# GEOG 215 Writing Assignment #2
>Topic: Career Plan V1
>
>Type: Writing + Discussion
>
>Style: Individual
>
>Word count:
>
> - Career Plan V1: 750
>
>
>Points possible: 750
>

# Homework Video
[Homework #3, Writing Assignment #2](https://youtu.be/9D-MpIyOkMU)

# Due Dates and Other Instructions
> Due date: Your materials should be completed and submitted by the start of the class period following week the assignment was assigned.
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your assignment is still due at the time and date of your registered section.
>
> Late assignments will not be counted toward your final grade without prior authorization from the instructor or according to the [University Excused Absence and Makeup Polcies](https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/).
>


# To Hand In
1. Enter links to your **shared** career plan along with your other details onto the [Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/omoaaueWaonrwMiU7)
    1. Google Doc version (as a shared file in Google Drive)

>
> Do not email the professor the link to your Google Doc or GitHub page.
>
> Enter the link to your Google Doc into the Google Drive Sheet above.
>
> Failure to enter your link into the Google Drive Sheet will result in a zero for this assignment
>

# ToDo
>
> In this assignment, you will reflect on what you have learned about the Geospatial Industry in this course to prepare a written document that expresses your opinions about which facet of the industry you would like to pursue, and why. We have covered many industries that utilize or develop Geospatial Technology, we have discussed reasons that your Geospatial career would or would not benefit from going to graduate school, and we have discussed the differences between Geospatial jobs in the public and private sectors.
>
> Your job is to construct a initial career plan, supported by reasonable arguments which are based on your individual perspective given your background, interests, and future goals. Your arguments should be based on your personal opinions, but be supported by facts you have learned this semester. Your arguments should support your plan.
>
> Your work should include:
>
>1. At least one specific Geospatial **industry**, **organization**, and **job** that you could see yourself working at in 15 years. Your choices for choosing each should be supported by  your arguments in some way; for example, you could rationalize why you chose that industry/organization/job by comparing and contrasting your choices with alternatives that you chose not to select. What aspects of this career/job are the most important for you? You will think through a plan to get this job.
>
> 2. A discussion of how you plan to get this job in the future. What activities will you pursue that will make you the most attractive candidate in the hiring pool to break into the Geospatial Industry and move upward? Do you plan to pursue internships or undergrad research, what networking opportunties will you seek out, how do your degree/track choices affect your future, and how will all of these and other factors  help you on your path to starting and being successful in your career? Where do you see potential pitfalls, and how are you mitigating potential consequences? What jobs do you need to get on your way to this dream job 15 years from now. What skills and experience will you need to aquire along the way? How do you plan to get them?
>
> 3. A discussion of your choices to seek one or more Geospatial Industry-related graduate degrees (or a degree that complements your Geospatial undergraduate degree). You should take a side (grad school or not), and provide arguments that support your side. Be specific - does the Geospatial industry/organization/job that you have planned for require or not require grad degrees? Will you make more money in the long run by doing/not doing a grad degree? Can you get josb that are more exciting or fullfilling with or without a grad degree?
>
> 4. A discussion of your choices to pursue a Geospatial career in public vs private sector (or both, through time). For each of the immediate (after graduation), medium term (5 years after graduation), and long term (15 years after graduation) yo should indicate if you plan to pursue a career in the public or private sector, and argue why you have made these decisions. You may choose to stay in one or the other for your whole career to rise up the ranks, start in one and eventually go to another as life happens, or switch back and forth chasing money, but your should have reasoned arguments for your plans.
>
> 5. Each student will create and/or upload a Google Doc version of their career plan.
>
> 6. Each student will **share the links** to the Google Doc version of their career plan.
> 
> 7. Each student will enter links for each document version into the [Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/omoaaueWaonrwMiU7).


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Writing - Individual Assessment](../rubrics/individualwriting.md)
>
