# GEOG 215 In-Class Activity: Week 13 
>Topic: Effectiveness in a Team
>
>Type: Reading + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Points possible: 1
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your in-class materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your in-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late in-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

## To Hand In
1. Each student group will  fill in the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/4Ekm62LmzBq31QNF2).


# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking, reading, and speaking skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a geospatial position and evaluating if a resume is appropriate for that position.


What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a resume for a geospatial position.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess the duties and qualifications of a job advertisement, company, and industry.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can compare the duties and qualification of a job ad against those listed in a resume."
    >
2. For students to be able to evaluate a person's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking - "I can articulate what knowledge, skills, and abilities a person has that make them qualified for a specific geospatial job."
    >
3. For students to be able to assess the the written work of another person.
    >
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can critically review the writing of a another person to assess quality, professionalism, and fit for a position."
	>
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can review the requirements for a job (skills, duties, and qualifications) and assess if a resume speaks to them."
    >

# ToDo
1. Each student will be paired with another student in the class

2. Students will introduce themselves to each other

3. Students will elect a secretary.

4. The group secretary will complete the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/4Ekm62LmzBq31QNF2).


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>

