# GEOG 215 In-Class Activity: Week 11 
>Topic: Networking
>
>Type: Reading + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Points possible: 1
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your in-class materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your in-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late in-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

## To Hand In
1. Each student pair will  fill in the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/d0cxQEOxTRULAsL92).


# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking, reading, and speaking skills in the context of reviewing the professional network LinkedIn page of another student.


What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of professional networking.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess the quality of another student's LinkedIn professional profile.
    >
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can critically review the writing of a another person to assess quality and professionalism."
	>
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can review the skills, qualifications, and experience of another person and provide meaningful feedback for making improvements."
    >

# ToDo
1. Each student will be paired with another student in the class.

2. Students will introduce themselves to each other.

3. Each student will complete the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/d0cxQEOxTRULAsL92).


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>

