# GEOG 215 Pre-Class Activity: Week 09
>Topic: Career Planning
>
>Type: Writing
>
>Style: Individual
>
>Word count:
>
> - 250 Words (half a single spaced page)
>
>Points possible: 4
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your pre-class materials should be completed and submitted before you come to class this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your pre-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late pre-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

# To Hand In
1. Each student will complete [the Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/jm81me6yq5fpenGE3)

# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking and writing skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a GIS position and tailoring a career plan for their future dream job.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a resume for a job application.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess what is needed for a dream job in the future.
    >
    > - Research  - "I can investigate the geospatial job market to determine what my dream job would be in 15 years."
    >
    > - Research  - "I can investigate the geospatial job market to determine what jobs I need in the short and medium term to make me a good candidate for my future dream job in 15 years."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can compare the duties and qualification of a job ad against my current knowledge, skills, and abilities, and build a plan to meet the requirements for a future job."
    >
# To Do

1. Each student will review the [pre-class materials for this lecture](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/09.md).

2. Each student will find a dream job that they want to be qualified for 15 years from now.

3. Each student will find at least two jobs that will build their knowledge, skills, abilities, and experience during their career to make them qualified for their dream job 15 years from now.

4. Each student will complete [the Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/jm81me6yq5fpenGE3)


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Preparation - Pre-Class](../rubrics/preparation.md)
>

