# GEOG 215 In-Class Activity: Week 08 
>Topic: Graduate School
>
>Type: Reading + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Points possible: 1
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your in-class materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your in-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late in-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

## To Hand In
1. Each student group will fill in the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/CTpraNp6oYwKpn3k2).


# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking and writing skills in the context of understanding how, when, and why to pursue a graduate degree.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a resume for a geospatial position.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop a rationale for attending (or not attending) graduate school.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can determine if a graduate degree is as part of my goals and plan for a successful career."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can determine which type of graduate degree I require to succeed in my career."
    >
    >
2. For students to articulate a rationale for attending (or not attending) graduate school.
    >
    > - Speaking  - "I can communicate how, when, and why a graduate degree is as part of my goals and plan for a successful career."
    >


# ToDo
1. Each student will be grouped with other students in the class who share the same goals for graduate school.

2. Students will introduce themselves to each other.

3. Students will elect a secretary.

4. Students will discuss their goals for graduate school (including not going)
    1. Why do they want to go to graduate school (or not)?
    2. What types of graduate education will they seek (or none)?
    3. What are the top reasons why they will chose to pursue graduate education (or not)?
    4. When do they plan to pursue graduate education (if applicable)?
    5. Why would they pursue graduate education at that time (if applicable)?

5. The group secretary will complete the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/CTpraNp6oYwKpn3k2).

6. Students will create an argument why their plan is the best, and defend it against the arguments from the other groups.

# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>

# Examples

1. With a PhD, Working at a University:
    1. You get to work on anything that you want as long as you can get it funded by someone (grants) and you produce academic outputs (papers).
    2. You get to be in charge - no one is going to tell you what you should or should not work on.
    3. Salaries are pretty good.
    4. "Summers off" - as much as you want them to be and/or need summer salary.
    5. Working with young people is exciting - they are interested in what you do, they have their futures in front of them.
    6. You want to do science every day, as your job.
    7. You want to be world renowned as an expert in a thing that you care about or are interested in.
    8. A PhD should be funded.

2. With a PhD, Working in Industry:
    1. You get to be in charge of people.
    2. You don't have to be responsible for raising all of the money to support your work.
    3. Salaries are pretty good.
    4. You get to do science, every day, as your job.
    5. A PhD should be funded.

3. Thesis MS Degree, Working in Industry
    1. The salary will be better than getting a PhD because you will have gotten raises each of the years that you would still be in school doing the PhD, and the salary differences between MS and PhD at a company are not that much different.
    2. With a thesis, it shows that you can tackle a hard science problem, start to finish.
    3. With a thesis, you become an expert in a thing, hopefully the thing that you want to spend your career doing.
    4. An MS with a thesis should be funded.

4. Graduate Certificate, Working in Industry
    1. A Graduate Certificate will give you the specific skills that you need to be better at your job.
    2. A Graduate Certificate is short - it is only a few classes (4-6), so it is not a gigantic committment of time.
    3. The courses in a Graduate Certificate should/would roll over into an MS should you want to do one in the future at the same university.
    4. Your employer will pay for it for you.

5. No Graduate Work, Working in Industry
    1. You are tired of school and never want to take another exam or do another homework assignment again.
    2. You were not good at school, and made it out, just barely.
    3. You have no time.
    4. No one will pay for it for you.
