# GEOG 215 Class Activity: Week 02
>Topic: The Geospatial Industry
>
>Type: Writing + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Word count:
>
> - No minimum or maximum
>
>Points possible: 10
>

# Activity Video
[02 - Activity](https://youtu.be/Y-J_8v09Hzs)

# Purpose
The purpose of this assignment is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their speaking and listening skills about a technical topic.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a  potential employment interview, or in a meeting with a supervisor.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess the attractive features of each of the industries that utilize geospatial data and technologies.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a technical geospatial topic and pull out the 5 key points that are the most important."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can assess the pro's and con's of geospatial industries according to my interests and abilities."
    >
2. For students to be able to communicate the key attractive features of a technical geospatial topic
    >
    > - Speaking - "I can articulate the 5 most important points of a technical geospatial topic."
    >
3. For students to be able to comprehend the key points of a technical geospatial topic
    >
    > - Listening - "I can hear information about a topic that I am not familiar with and interpret the main points."
    >
    > - Listening - "I can ask questions as needed to help my understanding."
    >
    > - Comprehension  - "I can take notes of important points so I don't have to ask again."
    >
4. For students to be able to interpret and summarize the important points of a technical geospatial  topic
    >
    > - Critical Thinking
    > - Interpretation
    > - Summarization



# Individual (Before class)
## Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your pre-class materials should be completed and submitted before you come to class this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your pre-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late pre-class materials will not be counted toward your final grade.

## ToDo
>1. Each student will review the [lecture materials for this class](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/02.md).
>2. Each student will pick an industry that they would like to be in, and create a list of 5 reasons why using this [Google Form](https://forms.gle/GVpqjd5ZMUjpuePDA)

<!-- Not enough time for this-->
<!-- 
# Partner/Team (In or after class)
## Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your partner/team materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week, or by the start of next class if you do the partner/team after/outside of class.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your partner/team materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late partner/team materials will not be counted toward your final grade.

## ToDo
>1. Each student will be paired with another student in the class
>
>2. Students will introduce themselves to each other
>
>3. Student #1 will describe an industry that they find the most exciting, and why, to Student #2
>
>4. Student #2 will complete this [Google Form](https://forms.gle/SVinje8HVYnatnDq8) capturing the following:
>       
>       1. Name of other student
>       2. Industry of other student
>       3. 5 key points (bullet list) that seem the most convincing from Student #1 of why Student #1's industry is the most exciting. 
>       4. How well was the other student able to explain their reasoning for selecting an industry
>           
>           Student #2 should organize this list in priority order - the most convincing as the first item in the list, the second most convincing as the second item, and so on.
>
> 5. Student #1 and #2 switch, do the same.
>
> 6. Student #1 will describe to the class what Student #2's industry choice is, and why. Student #2 will confirm if correct or not, jump in with more details, etc.
>
> 7. Student #1 and #2 switch, do the same.
-->

# Tips for picking an industry
1. What is your passion?
    >   
    >   What do you enjoy doing? This is going to be your job, so hopefully it is something that you enjoy doing, or you are working for a cause that you care about.
    >
    >   What things do you care about? Saving the environment? Making lots of money so you can buy a boat? Cancer? Obesity? Getting Republicans in/out of office?
    >

2. What do you hate doing?
    >   
    >   What do you despise doing? This is going to be your job, so hopefully it is not something that you hate doing.
    >
    >   What things can't you stand? Being outside with bees, fire ants, and snakes? Sitting in an office all day? Traveling? Math? Being busy? Being bored?
    >

3. What are your skills?
    >   
    >   What are you good at? For you to get a job in this industry, you should probably have the skills that the industry is looking for.
    >
    >   What can you do really well? Math? Critical thinking? Listening? Statistics? Organization?
    >

4. Where do you fit in the industry?
    >   
    >   What do imagine you will do in an industry? Not everyone can start a company and run it, what will you do?
    >
    >   How do you see yourself contributing to an industry? Starting a company? Helping an existing company earn more money? 
    >


# Example 
Goldberg: GIS Programming Industry

>
> GIS programming is the best industry because:
>
>   1. **Indoors.** You never have to go outside. There are bees, snakes, and fire ants outside and I wear flip flops every day. Fire ants and flip flops do not mix. I like AC, as much tea as I can drink, and accessible bathrooms.
>
>   2. **Money.** GIS programming pays the most of all GIS jobs, no matter what industry you are in. I like a job where I can make lots of money.
>
>   3. **Engineering.** I really like the engineering piece of software engineering. Creating a whole project/product/system in my mind, then writing the code to build it is awesome, and I want to do that.
>
>   4. **Impact.** I like to work on things that will be used by other people. Nobody does GIS programming at a company on a system that won't be used. The impact of the work that I do is really easy to see - people using my systems or tools.
>
>   5. **Solitude + Team.** Programming doesn't go any faster when two people are working on a keyboard. I like to be able to sit by myself and do my own work. However, few systems are standalone, so at times you do have to meet with other people and groups to talk about how your work fits into larger systems. I also like being part of a team that are all working toward the same goal.
>


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Preparation - Pre-Class](../rubrics/preparation.md)
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>
