# GEOG 215 Class Activity: Week 04
>Topic: Public vs Private Organizations
>
>Type: Writing + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Word count:
>
> - No minimum or maximum
>
>Points possible: 10
>

# Activity Video
[04 - Activity](video missing)

# Purpose
The purpose of this assignment is to provide students with an opportunity to research a type of geospatial organization (public/private), create a list of compelling reasons why they desire a job in that geospatial organization, and explain why they would be willing to work for a type of geospatial organization.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a  potential employment interview, or in a meeting with a supervisor.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability compare and contrast the pros and cons of working for a type of geospatial organization that is either public or private.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can assess the pros and cons of working at a type of geospatial organization (public/private)"
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can prioritize the factors for working at a type of geospatial organization (public/private)"
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can determine a type of geospatial organization (public/private) that I would like to work for"
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can judge the stability of an organization that I would like to work for"
    >
2. For students to be able to work as a team to develop and articulate an argument.
    >
    > - Speaking - "I can articulate attractive factors of an industry."
    >
    > - Speaking - "I can articulate the acceptable risk factors of an industry."
    >
    > - Listening - "I can respectfully hear and syntesize multiple opinions"
    >
    > - Speaking - "I can respond respectfully to other's opinions."
    >
    > - Listening - "I can ask probing questions of an individual to illicit additional information."
    >
    > - Listening - "I can provide constructive verbal and non-verbal feedback (nodding)."
    >
    > - Comprehension  - "I can take notes in order to create an argument and/or counter argument."
    >
3. For students to be able to present an argument for and against a topic
    >
    > - Speaking - "I can deliver my team's argument for a type of geospatial organization."
    >

# Individual (Before class)
## Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your pre-class materials should be completed and submitted before you come to class this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your pre-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late pre-class materials will not be counted toward your final grade.

## ToDo
>1. Review the [pre-class materials](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/04.md)
>
>1. Perform research to find an additional 3 factors why you would want to work in a type of geospatial organization. [LMGTFY](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=pros+and+cons+of+working+for+the+government)
>
>1. From the list of factors that differentiate between private and public organizations (provided in the materials + those that you found) , each student will :
>       1. Determine the factors that are important for them when deciding to work for either private or public.
>       2. Prioritize the 3 most important factors.
>
>1. Each student will identify a job at a company they could imagine applying for, and answer the following questions on this [Google Form](https://goo.gl/forms/XvimsWOqxYYKWsx33):
>       1. Categorize this organization.
>           1. Identify this company.
>           2. Is it government, for profit (publicly traded or privately held), or nonprofit organization?
>           3. How long has this organization been around?
>           3. How many employees do they have?
>           4. Is this organization growing or shrinking?
>           5. Do you think that this organization has a high turnover rate, and if so, why?
>           6. How does this organization support itself or make money?
>           7. What is this organization's reputation?
>       2. Why this specific or type of organization?
>           1. What are the positives for working for this type of or specific organization?
>           2. Are there risk factors associated with employment with this type of or specfic organization?
>           3. If there are risks, would you be willing to accept them, and why? Examples could include, but are not limited to such things as:
>               1. I would make tons of money so it would be worth it.
>               2. It is a stepping stone to another job.
>               3. I sould gain a lot of experience, etc.
>       3. Explain the top factors that make this specific or type of organization attractive.
>
> 3. Be prepared to defend working at this specific organization, and this type of organization (public or private).
>

<!-- 
# Partner/Team (In or after class)
## Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your partner/team materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week, or by the start of next class if you do the partner/team after/outside of class.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your partner/team materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late partner/team materials will not be counted toward your final grade.

## ToDo
>
>1. Student will be separated into those who want to work at public and private organizations
>
>2. Students on each team will answer the following questions on [this Google Form](https://goo.gl/forms/UtzJRdvIYEDK1XUG3)
>       1. What is the type of organzation they are arguing for?
>       2. What is beneficial about working for this type of organzation?
>       3. What is not good about about working for this type of organzation?
>           1. What are the risk factors? 
>           2. Why are these risk factors acceptable? 
>       4. Why are the other types of organzations not acceptable?
>
>3. All members of the team will collaboratively prepare an argument about why their type of organization is the preffered one.
>
>4. One representative from each tam will present the argument about their choice to the rest of the class.
>
>5. The representatives from each type of organization will debate on which is the better option.
>

-->

# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Preparation - Pre-Class](../rubrics/preparation.md)
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>
