# GEOG 215: Class Activity: Week 05
>Topic: The Job Getting Process
>
>       Getting a Letter of Recommendation
>
>
>Type: Writing + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Word count:
>
> - No minimum or maximum
>
>Points possible: 10
>

# Activity Video
[05 - Activity](https://youtu.be/iRI7z6HgtTc)

# Purpose
The purpose of this assignment is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their writing skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a GIS position and explaining to a potential letter of recommendation writer how and why they are a good candidate for the position.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a letter of recommentation request.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess how they meet the attractive features (duties and qualifications) of a job advertisement, company, and industry.
    >
    > - Research  - "I can investigate the company and industry offering a geospatial job."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can compare the duties and qualification of a job ad against my current knowledge, skills, and abilities."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can act on self awareness of my knowledge, skills, and abilities to explain to someone how and why I am qualified for a position."
    >
2. For students to be able to evaluate one's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Speaking - "I can articulate what knowledge, skills, and abilities I have that make me qualified for my chosen geospatial job."
    >
2. For students to be able rapidly market one's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Speaking - "I can rapidly articulate my knowledge, skills, abilities, and fit for a job and company to a potential letter of recommendation writer."
    >
3. For students to be able to assess the the written work of another person.
    >
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can review the requirements for a job (skills, duties, and qualifications) and assess if a letter of recommendation speaks to them."
    >
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can critically review the writing of a another person to assess quality and professionalism."
    >


# Individual (Before class)
## Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your pre-class materials should be completed and submitted before you come to class this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your pre-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late pre-class materials will not be counted toward your final grade.

## ToDo
>
>1. Each student will review a series of jobs and pick one job [from the search list](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/03.md#job-searches), or find another one on their own.
>       1. Each student will fill create a github page **in their account** for this activity at https://github.tamu.edu/YourName/GEOG-215/Activities/05/Readme.md 
>       2. Each student will include the following details on the github page:
>
>           1. Their name
>           2. The link to the job
>
>2. Each student will prepare an email to a potential letter of recommendation writer.
>
>   For the job that you have picked, you are going to practice approaching someone (via email) for a letter of recommendation. The letter should not be general, it should be in support of the specific job that you are applying for. The letter you get from the writer needs to list how your skills have been demonstrated to the person writing the letter, and this person has to be able to speak to your abilities. To accomplish this, you should inform the letter writer of the following:
>
>       1. A greeting;
>       2. Who you are and how you know the person;
>       3. Why are you contacting them;
>       4. What the job is, and at which company;
>       5. What the responsibilities of the job are, and how you can handle them;
>       6. What the skills are that this job requires, and how you have them; and
>       7. How your experience with this recommender has demonstrated that what you have done in the past fits what this job is asking for.
>
> 3. Each student will add the text and format of email request onto the github page for this activity.
>
>       1. Create a section header called "Email Request"
>       2. Enter the text of the email in this section
>
>
> 3. In many cases, a letter writer will ask you to "Please take a crack at writing the letter yourself, and I will edit."
>
>       You will take a shot at this by writing an example letter that your potential recommendation write can start from. You should include all of the information above.
>
> 4. Each student will add the text and format of example letter onto the github page for this activity.
>
>       1. Create a section header called "Example Letter"
>       2. Enter the text of the example letter in this section
>
> 5. Enter the link to **YOUR** github page which contains your recommendation letter request email and your example recommendation letter into [this Google form](https://forms.gle/EJbSWWBct4yKq6jm9).


<!-- 
# Partner/Team (In or after class)
## Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your partner/team materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week, or by the start of next class if you do the partner/team after/outside of class.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your partner/team materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late partner/team materials will not be counted toward your final grade.

## ToDo
>
>1. Each student will be paired with another student in the class
>
>2. Students will introduce themselves to each other
>
>3. Student #1 will review and critique the email from Student #2 asking for a letter of recommendation.
>
>       Student #1 will fill in this google form [In Class Activity - A](https://goo.gl/forms/tgRoHdhsxu9561NA3) evaluating the email from student #2.
>
>       1. Name of other student
>       2. Link to the github page containing the pre-class information of the other student
>       2. How well did the student request a letter of recommendation via email?
>           1. Did they provide the writer with background information about who they are and how they know the writer? 
>           2. Did they provide the writer with information about the job and company?
>           3. Did they provide the writer with specific skills and duties that are required for the job?
>           4. Did they provide the writer with evidence of how they are qualified for the job by listing their skills and experience?
>           5. Where did they do great? 
>           6. What could they do better?
>
>4. Student #1 will review and critique the example letter of recommendation from Student #2 asking sent to the recommender.
>
>       Student #1 will fill in this google form [In Class Activity - B](https://goo.gl/forms/LjvrTKHHYnZYc75H3) evaluating the sample letter from student #2.
>
>       1. Name of other student
>       2. How well did the student write a sample letter of recommendation?
>           1. Did they provide a high quality and professional introduction to the letter?
>               1. Did they provide how long and what capacity the letter writer has known the student? 
>               2. Did they provide a reason for the letter?
>
>                   I am writing this letter in support of [Person] applying for [Position] at [Organization]
>
>           2. Did they summarize how the student is qualified for the position?
>               1. Did they provide specific examples of how the student demonstrated that they can handle the specific responsibilities of the job, as listed in the advertisement?
>               2. Did they provide specific examples of how the student demonstrated the skills that are required for the job, as listed in the advertisement?
>           3. Did they provide a high quality and professional closing?
>               1. Did they reiterate how and why the student is a good fit for the job?
>               2. Did they reiterate a recommendation for the position?
>           4. Where did they do great? 
>           5. What could they do better?
>
> 5. Student #1 and #2 switch, do the same.
>

-->

# Tips for requesting a letter of recommendation (Pre-Class preparation)
>
> 1. Do: Reminder the letter writer who you are
>
>       If they don't remember you, they cannot (and possibly will not) write you a (good) letter. Remind the person who you are, when and where you interacted with them, and something good that you did which will jog their memory about you. If the letter writer has to look you up, or you make this difficult for them in any way, do not expect a (good) letter (or one at all).
>
> 2. Do: List specific skills (related to the job) that they know you have (because you demonstrated them to her/him in class, during an internship, etc.) to help them focus the letter for you. Provide them with specific skills that you want them to speak to your abilities on.
>
> 3. Do: Provide the letter writer with information about the what kind of job it is and what kind of company it is at. 
>
>       Explain why you want to work at this company and why you want this specific job. A letter writer cannot write a good letter, without knowing what job or company you are apply to, and why you want to work there.
>
> 4. Do: Provide your contact informaiton (phone number) in case they need to contact you to get more information to help them write the letter.
>
>       If the letter writer needs more details, they had better be able to get a hold of you at the instant they are writing the letter, or else it will fall of their plate and your letter will not be as strong. If they have to email you, there will be a time delay between when they are thinking about writing it, and it actually gets written once they get more details from you. This will not be good for you.
>
> 5. Do: Provide as much information as you possibly can. 
>
>       The more information that you can provide to the letter writer, the easier it makes it for them. You want this to be an easy job for them, or else they won't do it. They may ask you to write a first draft of the letter. If they do, do it.
>
> 6. Do: Provide an up to date copy of your resume. 
>
>       Again, make it easy for the writer. Provide them all of your accomplishments and experience in a simple easy to understand format (aka your resume). If you do not provide your resume, it makes it really hard to talk you up in a letter.


# Examples

## Example email asking for a letter of recommendation
>
> Dear Dr. Goldberg:
>
>   This is student X, I was in your GEOG 215 class in the Fall of 2018, and in your GEOG 478 class in Spring of 2019. You may or may not remember me. I was the student who was very interested in [something related to the job you are applying for]. My semester project was on [topic], and the report is available at [link to your portfolio].
>
>   I have recently become aware of a fantastic [job title] position at [company]. I believe that I am a strong candidate for this position and I am writing today to ask you to write a letter of recommendation to support my application for this position.
>
>   The job advertisement is seeking an individual who can perform the following tasks:
>   
>   1. Task 1
>   2. Task 2
>   3. Task 3
>   4. Task 4
>
>   The job is seeking these specific skills:
>
>   1. Skill 1
>   2. Skill 2
>   3. Skill 3
>   4. Skill 4
>
>   The experience that I gained by completing my semester project in your WebGIS class, plus the other courses that I have taken in TAMU Geography have provided me the neccessary [technical, technical, technical] skills to be successful in this position.
>
>   In addition, my professional experience at [company/internship] helped me refine these further and learn additional [technical, technical, technical] skills, and prepared me to take the next step in my career with this position.
>
>   I have included my resume along with this email in the hopes that you can use it to assess my qualifications for this position.
>
>   Many thanks in advance for your consideration. Should you have any questions or need any additional information, please call me on my cell phone at xxx-xxx-xxxx anytime that is convenient for you.
>
>   Regards,
>
>   [Your name]


## Example sample letter of recommendation

>
>   Dear [Recruiter Name]:
>
>   I am writing to you to provide my full support toward the application of [Student Name] for the [job title] position at your organization.
>
>   I have known [Student Name] for the last [number] of years, both as a student in my classes, and as a employee of my own.
>
>   I have been the supervisor of [Student Name] for the last ~year on the ADA routing network project here at TAMU, which is the base for our campus map https://aggiemap.tamu.edu. If you click on any of the routing stuff, that's his work.
>
>   [Student Name] has done a fantastic job. He was on the team with [other student] and did great work just like [other student] did. Unfortunately I was only able to nominate one Esri Dev Center Student of the Year ([other student]), but if two were allowed, [Student Name] would have been next on the list.
>
>   [Student Name]  has shown many strong qualities and I will just list the highlights here:
>
>   1. Mastery of ArcGIS suite of tools - ArcMap, ArcGIS Pro, AGOL, ArcGIS Server
>
>   2. Mastery of ArcGIS data management - development, maintenance, and support of routing networks in particular
>
>   3. Bug finding/fixing - Expert at in-depth analysis to determine the cause of errors in complex data sets that support complex services (routing network and non-computable routes), as well as fix the errors.
>
>   4. Documentation - He produced a very detailed manual for the next set of people who have to support our routing network to follow once he gets a job and leaves.
>
>   5. Teamwork - Was an excellent member of our project team. Could be counted on to do great work, on time. He was able to work with and communicate across a diverse group of faculty, staff, and students + developers, data managers, and operations people to get the project done.
>
>   6. Project management - Did a great job leading and organizing other student workers in a large field campaign to collect the door information (accessible, steps, etc.) that formed the initial data set from which all of this other routing work has taken place.
>
>   7. Presentation/speaking - He presented his work at the Esri conference this month, and did a fantastic job preparing the slides, delivering the material, and answering the (many questions) from the audience.
>
>   I would be very happy to have a call should you like to discuss his strengths in more detail. My cell phone is xxx-xxx-xxxx. You should hire him, he is an excellent candidate for the position.
>
>   Regards,
>
>   dan


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Preparation - Pre-Class](../rubrics/preparation.md)
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>
