# GEOG 215 In-Class Activity: Week 09 
>Topic: Communicating Effectively
>
>Type: Reading + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Points possible: 1
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your in-class materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your in-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late in-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

## To Hand In
1. Each student group will  fill in the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/N1IAKJi1OkNtMTxy2).


# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking, reading, and speaking skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a geospatial position and evaluating if a resume is appropriate for that position.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a resume for a geospatial position.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess a career plan.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and determine what is needed to be a good candidate for that job."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can assess the strenghts, weaknesses, and realism of the steps in a career plan to determine if the plan will achieve the desired end goal (aka dream job)."
    >

# ToDo
1. Each student will be teamed with other students in the class.

2. Students will introduce themselves to each other.

3. Students will elect a secretary.

4. Students will review the dream jobs of members of the team.

5. Students will review and discuss the career plans that team members have created to be qualified for the dream jobs of members of the team.
    1. What salaries are people seeking?
    2. What industries are the jobs in?
    3. What is the best plan for getting a dream job?
    4. What are the best steps that are proposed for getting the dream job?
    5. What are the biggest mistakes people make in their plans?

6. The group secretary will complete the [Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/N1IAKJi1OkNtMTxy2).


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>

