# GEOG 215 Pre-Class Activity: Week 06 - Resume
>Topic: Resumes
>
>Type: Writing
>
>Style: Individual
>
>Word count:
>
> - 500 Words (1 single spaced page)
>
>Points possible: 4
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your pre-class materials should be completed and submitted before you come to class this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your pre-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late pre-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

# To Hand In
1. Enter the link to your resume along with your other details into this [Google Form](https://forms.gle/VaCqgUhRPaaHLf6x9)
>
> Do not email the professor the link to your Google Doc.
>
> Enter the link to your Google Doc into the Google Drive Sheet above.
>
> Failure to enter your link into the Google Drive Sheet will result in a zero for this assignment
>

# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking and writing skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a GIS position and tailoring a resume to be appropriate for that position.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a resume for a job application.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess how they meet the attractive features (duties and qualifications) of a job advertisement, company, and industry.
    >
    > - Research  - "I can investigate the company and industry offering a geospatial job."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can compare the duties and qualification of a job ad against my current knowledge, skills, and abilities."
    >
2. For students to be able to evaluate one's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking - "I can articulate what knowledge, skills, and abilities I have that make me qualified for my chosen geospatial job."
    >
    >
3. For students to be able to create written materials for a job application packet.
	>
	> - Writing  - "I can create a professional resume that details how my knowledge, skills, abilities, and experience show that I am qualified for a position."
    >
# To Do

1. Each student will review the [pre-class materials for this lecture](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/06.md).

2. Each student will review a series of jobs and **pick a job** [from the search list](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/03.md#job-searches), or find another one on their own.


3. Each student will **prepare a resume tailored for the job** they have picked.
	> For the job that you have picked, you are going to practice tailoring a resume for that job. This resume should not be general, it should be in support of the specific job that you are applying for. The resume you create for this job needs to demonstrate that your experience, coursework, and skills make you qualified for this job. To accomplish this, your resume should include the following:
	1. A header with contact information;
		1. Full name;
		2. Phone number;
		3. @tamu.edu email;
		4. Portfolio link;
		5. Github link;
		6. Linkedin Link;
	2. Education;
		1. Degree(s) with major & minor;
		2. Year(s)/month(s) of graduation;
		3. GPA if above 3.0;
	3. Relevant Work & Project Experience;
		1. Position title;
		2. Orgnization name;
		3. Organization location;
		4. Date(s);
		5. Description of duties;
			1. 2 line(s) maximum per each experience
			2. Include keywords from the job advertisement
	4. Relevant Skills;
		1. Proficient in:
			1. Include keywords from the job advertisement
		1. Familiar with:
			1. Include keywords from the job advertisement

4. Create a version of your resume as a Google Doc;
	1. Create a Google Doc version; or
		1. [See here for instruction on creating a Google Doc](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/createAndShareAGoogleDoc.md)
	2. Upload and convert your MS Word version to a Google Doc;
		1. [See here for instructions on how to convert  your MS Word Doc into a Google Doc](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/convertWordToGoogleDoc.md)

5. Share the Google Doc version of your resume.
	1. [See here for instructions on sharing a Google File](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/shareAGoogleDriveFile.md)

6. Enter the shared link to your Google Doc resume and your other details into the [Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/VaCqgUhRPaaHLf6x9).


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Preparation - Pre-Class](../rubrics/preparation.md)
>

