# GEOG 215 Pre-Class Activity: Week 13
>Topic: Effectiveness in a Team
>
>Type: Writing
>
>Style: Individual
>
>Word count:
>
> - 500 Words (1 single spaced page)
>
>Points possible: 4
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your pre-class materials should be completed and submitted before you come to class this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your pre-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late pre-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

# To Hand In
1. Each student will complete [the Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/kvCYcktnBfGZiGtZ2)

# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking and writing skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a GIS position and tailoring a resume to be appropriate for that position.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a resume for a job application.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess how they meet the attractive features (duties and qualifications) of a job advertisement, company, and industry.
    >
    > - Research  - "I can investigate the company and industry offering a geospatial job."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can compare the duties and qualification of a job ad against my current knowledge, skills, and abilities."
    >
2. For students to be able to evaluate one's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking - "I can articulate what knowledge, skills, and abilities I have that make me qualified for my chosen geospatial job."
    >
    >
3. For students to be able to create written materials for a job application packet.
	>
	> - Writing  - "I can create a professional resume that details how my knowledge, skills, abilities, and experience show that I am qualified for a position."
    >
# To Do

1. Each student will review the [pre-class materials for this lecture](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/13.md).

2. Each student will complete [the Google Form for this activity](https://goo.gl/forms/kvCYcktnBfGZiGtZ2)


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Preparation - Pre-Class](../rubrics/preparation.md)
>

