# GEOG 215 Pre-Class Activity: Week 10 - Cover Letter
>Topic: Professional Writing - Cover Letters
>
>Type: Writing
>
>Style: Individual
>
>Word count:
>
> - 500 Words (1 single spaced page)
>
>Points possible: 4
>


# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your pre-class materials should be completed and submitted before you come to class this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 10:20AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your pre-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late pre-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

# To Hand In
1. Enter the link to your cover letter along with your other details onto this [the Google Form for this activity](https://forms.gle/pAyYX5pgzURbpntQ9)
>
> Do not email the professor the link to your Google Doc.
>
> Enter the link to your Google Doc into the Google Drive Sheet above.
>
> Failure to enter your link into the Google Drive Sheet will result in a zero for this assignment
>


# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking and writing skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a GIS position and tailoring a cover letter to be appropriate for that position.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a cover letter for a job application.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess how they meet the attractive features (duties and qualifications) of a job advertisement, company, and industry.
    >
    > - Research  - "I can investigate the company and industry offering a geospatial job."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can compare the duties and qualification of a job ad against my current knowledge, skills, and abilities."
    >
2. For students to be able to evaluate one's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking - "I can articulate what knowledge, skills, and abilities I have that make me qualified for my chosen geospatial job."
    >
3. For students to be able to create written materials for a job application packet.
	>
	> - Writing  - "I can create a professional cover letter that details how my knowledge, skills, abilities, and experience show that I am qualified for a position."
    >

# ToDo

1. Each student will review the [class materials about resumes and cover letters](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/06.md).

2. Each student will review the [pre-class materials for this lecture](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/10.md).

3. Each student will review a series of jobs and **pick a job** [from the search list](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/03.md#job-searches), or find another one on their own.

4. Each student will **prepare a cover letter tailored for the job** they have picked.
	>For the job that you have picked, you are going to practice tailoring a cover letter for that job. This cover letter should not be general, it should be in support of the specific job that you are applying for. The cover letter you create for this job needs to demonstrate that your experience, coursework, and skills make you qualified for this job, that you are unique, and that this job and company match your career goals. To accomplish this, your cover letter should include the following:

    1. Explain who you are and which job you are applying for.

    2. Explain why you want to work at the company.
		>What about the company gets you excited and why do you want to work there?

    3. Explain your career goals and how this job and company match them.
		>Include your career goals.
		>
		>Say how this company and job align with your goals.
		>
		>Use the job description as your guide and write what you want to do for a living.
		>
		>Include keywords from the job description.

    4. Explain how are you qualified to do what the job is asking for. 
		>Again, use the job description as your guide, but back it up with key points from your prior experience.
		>
		>Include keywords from the job description.

    5. Explain why the company should choose you, or what makes you unique.
		>Make it easy for the company to tell that you stand out from the rest of the resumes in the pile. 
		>
		>Do you have an interesting story or set of skills that provides you with experience or expertise that is relevant to the job, the company, or the industry?


5. Create a version of your cover letter as a Google Doc;
	1. Create a Google Doc version; or
		1. [See here for instruction on creating a Google Doc](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/createAndShareAGoogleDoc.md)
	2. Upload and convert your MS Word version to a Google Doc;
		1. [See here for instructions on how to convert  your MS Word Doc into a Google Doc](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/convertWordToGoogleDoc.md)

6. Share the Google Doc version of your cover letter.
	1. [See here for instructions on sharing a Google File](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/shareAGoogleDriveFile.md)

7. Enter the link to your Google Doc cover letter and your other details into the [the Google Form for this activity](https://forms.gle/pAyYX5pgzURbpntQ9).



# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Preparation - Pre-Class](../rubrics/preparation.md)
>
