# GEOG 215 Topic: Public versus Private Organizations

## Learning Objectives

*   Describe key characteristics of a public organization
*   Describe key characteristics of a private organization
*   Compare the differences between public and private organization
*   List the factors that make employment at a type of organization attractive or risky

## Lecture Video
### 2019 
[GEOG 215 - 04](https://youtu.be/eq4HfXerszY)

### 2020
- [M](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/9-BjuCo2ogHtnaOTaXHvR2OBvR_B26wJjs-lLUoAQJ6QEOSIUmTnB97eiUnCDBgK.NZmu7HD2cvzld67W) (Access Password: 3^6^xy&7)
- [W](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/9xnT5I1NW4qguQuO5LF_5MhBIjJOx1dWM9gNfbvy2t7f4_cS7UOPhpal1wLLcBIW.IjxUZV2WFZLGhc-x) (Access Password: AT4p+F!9)
- [F](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/rk_6wGMUQirlV09s2I_oFRniAAlWuJOMSCuiMERvMlZ4IKkL76X_u46a51r4cVbK.HzhrJr-82RJCECvu) (Access Password: 2FpFa&xC)

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activity](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/04.md#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activity](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/04.md#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session
-->

# Types of GeoSpatial Organizations

For the purposes of this material, the first classification that will divide the types of geospatial organizations that individuals can be employed at will be governmental organizations versus commercial organizations. Governmental organizations include any types of organizations that employ geospatial professionals and are public agencies or organizations at the federal, state, or local level. Commercial organizations include any type of geospatial organization that is not a governmental organization, such as for- and non-profit organizations. Within for-profit organizations, distinctions are made between publicly traded and privately-held organizations. 


## Governmental Organizations

A governmental organization is one which is funded by the government; taxpayers, more specifically. By working at one of these organization, you typically become either a federal or state employee, meaning your employer is the US Government or the State of Texas, for example. These organizations exist literally everywhere across the US, and span literally every type of industry that you can imagine. Interested in being a geospatial analyst in law enforcement? There are jobs for you at the federal level (DHS, FBI, etc.), sate level (Texas Rangers, NJ State Police), and local level (College Station Police). Interested in the environment? There are geospatial jobs for you at the federal level (EPA, BLM), state level (Texas Commission on Environmental Quality [TCEQ], Texas Natural Resources Information System [TNRIS]), and local level (City of College Station). Geospatial Health more your thing? Geospatial job opportunities exist at the federal (National Institutes of Health [NIH], Centers for Disease Control & Prevention [CDC]), state (TX Texas Department of State Health Services [DSHS]), and local (Brazos County Health Department) levels, again.


### Federal

**Location:** Everywhere. While you might expect that all federal jobs mean you have to move to Washington DC, you would be wrong. To be sure, there are TONS of federal geospatial jobs in DC, but there are also federal jobs located all around the country. You can thank your Senators and Congressmen and Women for "bringing home the bacon" and helping ensure that citizens of their state and district have federal employment opportunities within every state of our nation.

**Types of Industries:** All of them. If there is an industry, there is a federal organization that regulates it and requires mapping of some kind. From banking, to weather, to real estate, to insurance, to health, to agriculture and beyond, there are federal agencies with federal employees making maps to provide the public, decision-makers, and policy-setters with better information to make better choices.

**Types of Jobs:** All of them. You name a geospatial title or a set of duties and responsibilities, and there is someone doing it somewhere in the federal government. Programming? Yes. Analysis? Yup. Administration? Yessir. Technician? You bet.


### State

**Location:** All 50 of them, plus all them territories. Big surprise - there are state-level agencies in every state and territory, and just like the federal government, they all need maps and geospatial analysis to help make better decisions, save money, protect the public, etc.

**Types of Industries:**  Depends on the main industries in the state. Live in an agricultural state? There are probably lots of state geospatial jobs looking at problems and opportunities in the agricultural sector. Live in NJ? There are probably very few geospatial jobs looking at mining concerns, because mining is not one of the biggest industries in New Jersey. 300 years ago, lots of mining; today, not so much. Live in Colorado? Different mining situation, so much different geospatial mining jobs situation. If you are trying to figure out what types of geospatial jobs are available in a state, one approach would be to determine the main products and services that are produced or sold in that state. Those industries will be a really good start for narrowing down on the industries that will offer geospatial employment opportunities.

**Types of Jobs:** All, again.


### Local

**Location:** Gets a little trickier. If you live in a city, there likely are geospatial jobs with the city or county that you live in. If you live in the suburbs, it's possible that you might have to travel to a nearby city in order to find a geospatial job, because the city where you live does not have a Planning or GIS department of its own. If you live in a rural community (especially in Texas), it is quite likely that your local government is not super sophisticated in its use of GIS, possibly not even having digital parcel maps. This is not to say that no rural communities or counties in Texas have Planning, Health, Infrastructure, Agricultural, or Assessment offices that use GIS, but there certainly are a lot that do not. In many cases groups of cities or counties get together in Councils of Governments (COGs) to pool and share resources, because no one community would have enough on its own to support GIS setup, maintenance, or operations, but together, they can support a working system across each of the local communities can benefit from.

**Types of Industries:** Depends even more on the types of things happening in a city or county, and what the tax base and population of that city or county are. If you live in Houston, Austin, San Antonio, or Dallas, there will be GIS jobs for the local government across all of the main aspects of public services - Planning, Health, Law Enforcement & Life Safety, Appraisal (Taxes), Education, and Environment among potentially many others. These cities have large populations which require a great deal of public services, almost all of which requires mapping for intelligent planning, operations, and decision-making. These populations also earn and spend a lot of money, so the cities have budgets that can be used to support the salaries of employees who do mapping for each of these local agencies and departments. If you live in a city or county that has a particularly high concentration of an industry, like refining in Harris County, you may find a particular spike in types of geospatial jobs related to that industry. If instead you live in a suburban or rural county where the population is low and the types of industries around is not super-diverse, you may find that there are fewer and fewer geospatial jobs available at the local level. Since population and taxes are low, there are less funds to support geospatial professionals, resulting in less and less opportunities to work for a local agency or department within a specific industry of your choosing. If available, you would likely work as a geospatial professional for a critical service, such as Planning, Health, or Law Enforcement.

**Types of Jobs:** Large cities and counties (by population, not size) - All. Rural communities - probably one position that does the jobs of all positions. 


## Commercial Organizations

In this discussion, anything which is not a federal, state, or local organization is considered a "commercial" organization. This is a broad categorization, since there are obviously some organizations, such as non-profits, which do no focus on making money, but we need to have categories don't we, so there you are. This category includes both for-profit and non-profit (or not for profit) organizations. For-profit organizations are further broken down into publicly traded firms, like Apple and Google, and privately held organizations, like Esri.


### For Profit

For-profit organizations, as the name implies, are those where a significant focus of the organization is to make money. They may have many other altruistic agenda's, like curing the world's diseases, making GIS accessible to everyone, or ending global hunger, but somewhere in there, at their core, these companies must make money or they go out of business. 


#### Publicly Traded

A publicly traded company is one that offers shares that can be bought or sold on a stock exchange like the New York Stock Exchange, the London Stock Exchange, and the NASDAQ. These companies generally have a Board of Directors, Chief Executive Officers (CEOs), Chief Financial Officers (CFOs), and many other corporate-sounding positions, events (stockholder meetings), and structures (the corporate ladder). Companies in this category that would hire people in the geospatial industry include nearly every super-large company in every super-large industry that you have ever heard of. High tech? Apple, Google, IBM. Agriculture? Monsanto, John Deere, Tractor Supply. Health? Aetna, Signa. Construction? Home Depot, Lowes. Defense? Boeing, Lockheed, BAE. Accounting? DeLoitte, KPMG. Finance? Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Citigroup. Oil, Gas, and Energy? ConocoPhillips, Exxon, Concho. The list is endless. 

**Location:** Everywhere there is a city. Publicly traded companies have offices in every city in the nation. Some corporate offices in certain cities may focus on specific aspects of the business - El Segundo for Boeing satellites, and some cities may have particularly high concentrations of particular industries - Silicon Valley for high tech and Atlanta for health. Corporations with significant retail arms (banks, home improvement stores, dollar stores, coffee stores, and so on) may have branches on seemingly every corner of every city, but in most cases there are no geospatial jobs at these retail sites. Do you think there is a gal/guy in the back of every Starbucks making maps of where to put the next starbucks? Probably not. In most cases, the geospatial component of planning, analysis, and real time tracking is done at the corporate headquarters, wherever that may be. So, if there is a particular industry or corporation that you would like to contribute your geospatial knowledge, skills, and abilities to, you may find yourself moving to the city where the headquarters of that organization is located.

**Types of Industries:**  All. By definition, if there is an industry, there is at least one publicly traded company in it. Every industry has at least one company that is using maps to make better decisions, predict the future, analyze the past, or understand its market or customers. Companies that are leveraging geospatial are the ones that have the best information and make the best decisions, and unsurprisingly, are making the most money. 

**Types of Jobs:** All. Pick geospatial job title, and yup. It is in a publicly traded company.


#### Privately Held

A privately held for profit organization is one that is definitely for profit, for sure, but does not have stockholders. It does not sell shares to raise money to support itself or expand. It has enough money of its own, from whatever it sells or offers as a service, to support its own operations and growth. These types of companies range from the mega (Esri) to the teenie weenie (every mom and pop business that you have ever heard of). When you hear of "small businesses" every time there is an election, and every candidate is promising to support or bring them back, this is who they are talking about. This is the proverbial difference between "Main Street" and "Wall Street" as so many candidates for office are fond of saying. Some of these companies, like Esri, are not so small, but they are still privately held, which primarily means that they do not sell shares and the company is completely owned by one person, two people, a team of people, or some other structure. While there are tons and tons and tons of privately held businesses, the vast majority are very very small, with just a few employees - think of any attorney, accountant, plumber, or restaurant you have ever dealt with. What do they have 1, 2, 5, 15 employees? While few to none in these particular industries probably employ geospatial professionals full time, they likely use geospatial services from other small businesses to help them market, get clients, or find potential sites for new locations. If you have free time and start offering your GIS skills to local businesses, churches, or government agencies, you are now a privately held geospatial organization. You and your homeboy or homegirls want to start taking on some of the work from ELance, you are now a small business. You do not have to form a company (LLC, etc.) to be a business. As soon as you start getting checks, you are now a small business; welcome to the club.

**Location:** Everywhere. If people live there, there is a small business there. Do all of these small businesses hire geospatial professionals? Obviously not. Where are the geospatial jobs at privately held for profit organizations? Where the money is. What does that mean? If there is an industry making money somewhere, there will likely be a geospatial job there. Live in (or want to live in) a high growth area like College Station where construction is booming? There will be lots of geospatial jobs at engineering companies like Gessner Engineering. Live in an area where there is a top-tier university like College Station? There will be lots of privately owned student startups trying to cash in on emerging markets like drone surveying (Osprey Geospatial). The higher the population in a region, the greater the number of privately owned firms that will be looking for geospatial talent to help them grow (sales jobs) or do the actual work (analysts, technicians, programmers).

**Types of Industries:**  All. If there is money to be made, someone will have started a company to help serve the geospatial needs of that industry. Again, there will be clusters of companies serving different industries where any particular industry is hot in that area, but you can count on jobs at these firms to be everywhere you want to be serving industries that you want to be in. Some firms specialize in certain industries (engineering, health, high tech), while others, like Esri, strive to deliver solutions that all industries are looking for.

**Types of Jobs:** All. Small firms might have a one GIS person doing all of the GIS work (from administration and setup, to analysis and modeling, to sales). Other larger firms might have teams of geospatial professionals, allowing workers to specialize in one set of tasks, topics, or industries that they serve.


### Non-Profit Organizations

Non-profit organizations are **not** the exact opposite of for-profit organizations. Just because you work at a nonprofit does not mean that no one will be talking about money, that money is not required to keep the organization afloat and employees paid, or that there are not individuals at the organization whose job it is to keep money flowing in and out. If there are full-time people that work there, they need to be paid, and that money needs to come from somewhere. Sure, there are many organizations that rely on non-paid volunteers to accomplish a lot of the work of the organization, but most nonprofits still have some kind of budget, and that money comes from somewhere.

The main difference between a for-profit and a nonprofit is that money is not the **only** motivating factor that drives the decision making for the organization. In the US, nonprofits must register with the federal governments as some kind of nonprofit tax status, typically a 501 (c)(3), though other options exist. Each nonprofit must have a cause for which they exist - ending world hunger, supporting women in engineering, engaging the youth of america in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) experiences to help deliver a future for America where we continue to lead the world in science and technology, making sure that there are ducks, etc. You name an important problem facing the nation or world today, and there is a nonprofit whose mission is to help solve that problem. Not all of these employ geospatial professionals (or ask for volunteers with geospatial abilities), but many do. As with any organization, (just like for-profits), those organizations who recognize the value of geospatial and know how to leverage the knowledge, skills, and abilities of geospatial professionals will have better information with which to make better decisions, plan their initiatives, and evaluate the efficacy of their operations.

There are both very small and very large nonprofits, ranging from a single motivated individual or small group of people ([Health City](http://www.healthycity.org)) all the way to multinational organizations sometimes with tens of thousands of volunteers ([Open Street Map](https://www.openstreetmap.org)). Many of these do not have paid geospatial positions, but some do, like [Ducks Unlimited](http://www.ducks.org), [American Cancer Society](www.cancer.org), and the [Association of American Geographers](www.aag.org) (AAG).

**Location:** Where are there nonprofits? Everywhere. Where are there nonprofits that hire geospatial professionals? Less so. There will be many in the Washington DC area, since that is where the headquarters of many of the largest nonprofits are. Outside of DC, few and far between. These jobs will be where the headquarters of a particular nonprofit is located.

**Types of Industries:**  What types of industries do nonprofits work in? All. Which ones have paying positions? Not so many. Volunteer opportunities so get some work experience and have interesting substantial projects to list of on your resume? All over the place.

**Types of Jobs:** What kind of paying geospatial jobs are at nonprofits? Not so many. GIS analyst positions will be the most common ones, but you will also see opportunities for technicians, developers, and administrators at some of the large ones. Internships? Quite common, because you are a short term investment who will be there for a defined period of time to help get a job done, and the organization is not committing to a career for you.


# Pros and cons of different types of employment


## Government


### Salary & benefits


#### Pros



*   Government Scale (GS) salaries for federal jobs. You will know what you are going to get. 
*   Some kind of retirement. Getting worse and worse every day, but there will be some kind of retirement plan.
*   Money for education to get a masters, or other kind of training. Not tons, not dedicated for you, and it make take you a few years to complete your degree on the federal government dime, but there will be some money available.
*   Health insurance should be provided for you.
*   You will be a W2 worker, which means you are an actual employee and the organization will pay (a portion of) your taxes and benefits.
*   Vacation, sick leave, and holidays will all be available to you to not work during.


#### Cons



*   Government Scale (GS) salaries for federal jobs. You will know what you are going to get, but it is not going to be the same as you would make in private industry.
*   For state and local, your salaries may not be as high as federal jobs, and definitely not as has as in the private sector.


### Legal & regulatory ramifications


#### Cons



*   You will be subject to security regulations possibly including but not limited to, security clearances, espionage concerns, export control issues, and federal regulations.
*   You may be subject to freedom of information requests.


### Hiring constraints


#### Pros



*   If you are a veteran, you may receive Veteran's Preference during the hiring process - if all candidates score the same, they have to pick the veteran.


#### Cons



*   Many jobs in some parts of "government" are for US citizens only (federal defense jobs, in particular).
*   All jobs will require one's demonstrated ability to be employed in the US.


### Work environment


#### Pros



*   Very structured - There is a clear organizational chart of who reports to whom, whose responsibility is what, what your role in the organization is
*   For most people, you get to leave your 40 hour per week job at work. When you go home, you probably do not have too much more work to do.
*   You should be able to count on a solid Human Resources (HR) group to make sure that your workplace is welcoming, diverse, and respectful.


### Staff turnover


#### Pros



*   Since government jobs are considered "cushy" by many, there is a possibility that there will be low turnover rates and you can keep your job forever.


#### Cons



*   Since government jobs are considered "cushy" by many, there is a possibility that there will be low turnover rates and you will be stuck with the same people forever.
*   Since government jobs do not pay a ton, there may be turnover as the best people transition to the private sector for better pay.


### Culture & climate


#### Pros



*   You and your coworkers will be expected to be professional, or HR may have some problems with you.


#### Cons



*   You and your coworkers will be expected to be professional, or HR may have some problems with you.


### How money is spent


#### Pros



*   There will be super-strict financial oversight of how money gets allocated and spent.


#### Cons



*   There will be super-strict financial oversight of how money gets allocated and spent.


### ADA


#### Pros



*   The government is required by law to ensure that accommodations are made for those with disabilities.


### Risks


#### Pros



*   There is little risk that the government will go out of business, so your position is generally secure unless a major reorganization takes place.
*   Government jobs typically have solid HR groups so you can inform supervisors about other troublesome employees.
*   Some states are "at will" employment states which means that you can leave your job at any time.


#### Cons



*   Government jobs typically have solid HR groups so you may have HR hurdles that you need to jump through if you are a troublesome employee - Personnel Improve Plans (PIPs), and the like.
*   You are a public employee, so you are held to a very high standard. If you do something illegal or unethical, you will be terminated. If the news gets a hold of it, you may lose your career.
*   Some states are "at will" employment states which means that you can be fired at any time for any reason.


### Promotion and advancement processes


#### Pros



*   In most cases, there will be a clear path toward promotion. You may not like how long it takes or what you need to do to get promoted, but it should be documented somewhere.


### Training


#### Pros



*   Government jobs often have training opportunities where you can use your work time to learn something new that is related to your job.


#### Cons



*   Government jobs definitely require annual or semiannual training where you demonstrate that you are a responsible employee - Waste, Fraud, and Abuse training/tests that you have to take every year, Information Security Awareness training/tests that you have to take every year, Discrimination Free Workplace training/tests that you have to take every year, etc. These will become annoying, but are very important.


### Organizational Mission


#### Pros



*   You are a public servant. The mission of the organization you are working for is to help make America better in some way.


#### Cons



*   Your organization is not focused on making money, so there will not be a lot of it. You will hear "that's a great idea, if we only had a budget for it ..." a lot. 


## For profit


### Salary & benefits


#### Pros



*   Higher pay than a government job. 


##### Public and large private companies



*   Health insurance should be provided for you.
*   You will be usually be a W2 worker, which means you are an actual employee and the organization will pay (a portion of) your taxes and benefits.
*   Vacation, sick leave, and holidays will all be available to you to not work during.
*   Companies have to compete to get the best workers so you should expect some kind of retirement. Typically an employer-matched 401(k).
*   Profit sharing, stock option, and yearly bonuses are not atypical.
*   Often money for education to get a masters, or other kind of training. Depending on company, they may fund the whole thing.


##### Small private companies



*   Small companies may offer a stake in the company to its very early employees.
*   Being one of the first employees at a company that starts small and gets gigantic could make you the next Steve Ballmer, or Steve Wozniak, or Clint Brown - pretty well off to very rich, much later in life, after a ton of hard work.


#### Cons


##### Small private companies



*   Small companies may not have money to contribute to your retirement.
*   Small companies may not offer money for education, or other kind of training. Depending on the company, you may be expected to get training on your own dime.
*   Small companies may hire you as a 1099 worker which means that you will be expected to pay your own taxes and healthcare costs.


### Hiring constraints


#### Pros


##### Public and large private companies



*   If you are a veteran, you may receive Veteran's Preference during the hiring process - if all candidates score the same, they have to pick the veteran.


##### Small private companies



*   May be able to work with specific or otherwise strange immigration issues. If this is the case, you should expect to be a 1099 worker.


#### Cons


##### Public and large private companies



*   Many jobs may be for US citizens only (federal defense contractor jobs, in particular).
*   All jobs will require one's demonstrated ability to be employed in the US.


### Work environment


##### Public and large private companies



*   Very structured - There should be a clear organizational chart of who reports to whom, whose responsibility is what, what your role in the organization is.
*   You should be able to count on a solid Human Resources (HR) group to make sure that your workplace is welcoming, diverse, and respectful.
*   Your "should" have pretty good equipment and other technical resources. Companies make money when you have the things you need to do your job; big ol fortune 500 companies may get you that Alienware computer or super-duper server with tons of memory and CPU cores you need, if it will make you more productive.


##### Small private companies



*   Very dynamic work environment. Since these little guys are hustling for money and to get off the ground, you may get to work on a wide variety of things frequently. If you like such environments, this is a pro.


#### Cons



*   For many jobs, during certain periods, you may be expected to work more than 40 hours per week. You may or may not get overtime for this. Welcome to the salaried, corporate world.
*   For many jobs, you will not get to leave your 40 hour per week job at work. When you go home, you may have much much more work to do.


##### Small private companies



*   Very dynamic work environment. Since these little guys are hustling for money and to get off the ground, you may be forced to work on a wide variety of things frequently. If you do not like such environments, this is a con.


### Staff turnover


#### Pros


##### Public and large private companies



*   Since the pay is better than working for the government, and these companies are mature, there should be less turnover than at government organizations. 


#### Cons



*   The only way to get a promotion may be to take a new job at a different company.


##### Small private companies



*   Since these companies are often living hand to mouth, funding for your position could run out at any time. This uncertainty may cause staff to leave frequently for more secure positions with larger organizations.


### Culture & climate


#### Pros


##### Public and large private companies



*   You and your coworkers will be expected to be professional, or HR may have some problems with you.
*   If you work for a really big company, they may provide you with amazing work amenities - a cafe, a masseuse, a slide that you can take to your desk.


#### Cons


##### Public and large private companies



*   You and your coworkers will be expected to be professional, or HR may have some problems with you.


##### Small private companies



*   There may not be any HR in the organization.
*   There company or employees may be as professional as at a larger organization.


### How money is spent


#### Pros



*   A lot more flexibility in how dollars get spent. Whatever it takes to make money is what money will get spent on.


### ADA


#### Pros


##### Public and large private companies



*   Large companies will be required to provide accommodation to those with disabilities.


### Risks


#### Cons



*   A company can go out of business, be sold, restructure, or lose a contract that was paying you at any time. If any of these happen, you may wake up to find out that you no longer have a job.
*   Some states are "at will" employment states which means you can be fired at any time for any reason.
*   When you work at a company, they may own everything that you do, even in your non work time.
*   A company may require you to sign a non-compete agreement which limits your employment options when you leave a company.
*   A company will likely require you to sign an NDA which limits what you can talk about before, during, or after you work at a company.


##### Small private companies



*   Small companies may not be required by law to provide accommodation to those with disabilities.


### Promotion and advancement processes


#### Pros


##### Public and large private companies



*   At large companies, there should be a clear path toward promotion. You may not like how long it takes or what you need to do to get promoted, but it should be documented somewhere.


#### Cons



*   You may have to leave a company to get a promotion.


##### Small private companies



*   At small companies, there may not be a clear path toward promotion. If you are the only person doing geospatial analysis, it could be quite difficult to get a promotion.


### Training


#### Pros


##### Public and large private companies



*   Large companies often have training opportunities where you can use your work time to learn something new that is related to your job.


#### Cons


##### Public and large private companies



*   Large companies may require annual or semiannual training where you demonstrate that you are a responsible employee - Waste, Fraud, and Abuse training/tests that you have to take every year, Information Security Awareness training/tests that you have to take every year, Discrimination Free Workplace training/tests that you have to take every year, etc. These will become annoying, but are very important.


##### Small private companies



*   Small companies might expect you to train yourself (and pay for it yourself)


### Organizational Mission


#### Pros



*   The mission of for profit companies is, at their core, to make money. If you like money, this is a good thing.


#### Cons



*   The mission of for profit companies is, at their core, to make money. If you do not value money over all else, this may not be a good thing.


## Nonprofit


### Salary & benefits


#### Pros


##### Large Nonprofits



*   May offer competitive salary
*   May provide retirement plans - 403(b) or 401(k)
*   May offer money for education and training
*   Will typically hire full time staff as W2 employees
*   Will typically provide health insurance


#### Cons


##### Small Nonprofits



*   May offer lower salary than government or for profit organizations
*   Probably do not provide retirement plans
*   Probably do not offer money for education and training
*   May hire staff as 1099 employees, requiring you to pay taxes and healthcare


### Hiring constraints


#### Pros



*   May be able to accommodate non-standard immigration situations.


### Work environment


#### Pros



*   Everyone who works there will be invested in the mission of the organization, so you should be surrounded by like minded people who value the same thing(s) as you.


#### Cons



*   Money will always be a problem. There will be lots of belt tightening, always. Expect to do more with less.
*   For many jobs, during certain periods, you may be expected to work more than 40 hours per week. You may or may not get overtime for this.
*   For many jobs, you will not get to leave your 40 hour per week job at work. When you go home, you may have much much more work to do.


### Staff turnover


#### Cons



*   Since salaries will not be high, and money will always be an issue, expect people to be looking for more stable employment all the time.


### Culture & climate


#### Pros



*   You and everyone else that works there will share the same values.


#### Cons



*   Given that money will always be an issue, people may be stressed out frequently.


### How money is spent


#### Pros



*   Money will typically be spent to support the mission of the organization.


#### Cons



*   Nonprofit accounting has fairly stringent account requirements.


### ADA


#### Pros



*   Nonprofits will generally be accomodating for those with disabilities.


#### Cons



*   While nonprofits may wish to be accomodating for those with disabilities, they may not have the resources to meet every need.


### Risks


#### Cons



*   Nonprofits are always on shoestring budgets, so it is not uncommon for people to lose their jobs for financial reasons.


### Promotion and advancement processes


#### Pros


##### Large Nonprofits



*   May have clear career ladders and defined paths toward promotions.


#### Cons


##### Small Nonprofits



*   May not have clear career ladders and defined paths toward promotions.


### Training


#### Pros


##### Large Nonprofits



*   May have funding available for training.


#### Cons


##### Small Nonprofits



*   May expect staff to train themselves, and/or pay for it themselves.


### Organizational Mission


#### Pros

*   Perhaps the most important reason to work at a nonprofit. Everyone who works there will be committed to the cause. If this cause is important to you, you will be surrounded by like minded people all working to the same goal. 
*   Every nonprofit will be dedicated to its mission, not on making money. 

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [pre-class assignment](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/04.md#pre-class)
- Prepare to participate in the  [in-class activity](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/04.md#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an [in-class activity](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/04.md#in-class) assessing [pre-class assigment](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/04.md#pre-class) completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session
