# GEOG 215 Topic: The Job Getting Process

## Learning Objectives
*   Describe the different components of the hiring process
*   Describe different strategies to succeeding in the hiring process


## Lecture Video
### 2019 
[GEOG 215 - 05](https://youtu.be/WRoSfKare94)

### 2020
- [M]()
- [W](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/Gsqs3Vlell8hECjDlq9T8Cs4G2VrMkJ8b6LTxQZSu-Wsp-dUgfNcA0CXkL62_LXS.Ayt6swlbpyHisr3S) (Access Password: Sm%221jQ)
- [F](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/qZMDaYc78gBFagY54t_BC4OK6HiJ5hPbXV7Hdt6mKP682MCE3XXsCLWCrYov531j.6FsD1oJftUvtXwJF) (Access Password: ?WD53H7n)

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activity](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/05.md#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activity](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/activities/05.md#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session
-->

# The Job Getting Process

As you enter into the hiring processing, you will discover that searching for a job **IS** a full time job on its own. From finding available positions, to crafting a resume and cover letter that are relevant and specific to a position, through the phone and in-person interviews, through the negotiation of salary and benefits, this can be the most stressful thing that you have ever done. Worst of all is the **waiting**. Waiting to hear after you send in your resume online, waiting to hear following your phone interview, waiting to hear after your in-person interview. The not hearing back, oh, the not hearing back.... During all of this time, your head will be spinning and you will be wondering and wondering and wondering, "did I do ok", "I thought this was supposed to be a sure thing, what's taking so long", "why am I not getting any calls back about my resume"?

Though extremely stressful, time consuming, and anxiety creating, the job hunt is one of the most important things you will do in your life. If like most people, you will get your first job based on what jobs are available at the time you graduated (and be sure, you will apply for them all). You may have a desired industry, a desired location or city you want to live in, or a desired type of organization you want to work for (government, private, non-profit), but, not the company you want to work for may not be hiring when it is convenient for you, or the jobs in open in the city that you want are not the ones that you are qualified for, etc. For many of us, we apply to every job that is available, interview with the first one that contacts us back, and probably take that offer if there are no other companies or organizations that are sniffing around our resume seriously.

This lecture attempts to demystify the various parts of the job hunting and getting process, and provides some insight on how you can put yourself, your resume, your knowledge, skills, and abilities, and your personality in the best possible light to give you the highest probability of getting that job that you want.


# The Job Search


## The Lists

The job searching process is by far, the most time consuming and often frustrating part of the hiring process. There are numerous websites which post online job advertisements relevant to positions in the geospatial industry. [This table from our prior lecture](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/03.md#job-searches) shows several of these sites including [Indeed.com](https://www.indeed.com/jobs?q=%22gis%22), [GlassDoor.com](https://www.glassdoor.com/Job/jobs.htm?sc.keyword=GIS), [Google Jobs](https://www.google.com/search?q=%22gis%22&ibp=htl;jobs#fpstate=tldetail), [GIS Jobs Clearinghouse](http://www.gjc.org), and [MyGISJob.com](https://www.mygisjobs.com/). Websites like these allow you to search for specific types of jobs, as well as narrow down your search by location and company. Some of these sites are specific to the geospatial industry (GIS Jobs Clearinghouse, and MyGISJob.com), and others are general job-posting websites (the others) within which are included some geospatial gems that you will need to search for. 


## The Salaries

Some of the sites listed will show salary for the specific job that you are viewing, though this is often uncommon for non-government jobs. In most other cases, general job-searching websites like [Glassdoor.com](https://www.glassdoor.com/Salaries/gis-analyst-salary-SRCH_KO0,11.htm) will show you expected salary ranges ([distributions](https://www.glassdoor.com/Salaries/gis-analyst-salary-SRCH_KO0,11.htm)) based on user-submitted data at the national, local, and organization levels for specific job titles. You can search for specific average salaries for positions in specific areas, such as "[Average GIS salaries in the Dallas/Fort Worth Areas](https://www.glassdoor.com/Salaries/dallas-gis-analyst-salary-SRCH_IL.0,6_IM218_KO7,18.htm)." In some instances, Glassdoor will also show you the salaries for position titles at a specific company, such as [these salaries for positions at Esri](https://www.glassdoor.com/Salary/Esri-Salaries-E4043.htm). Since these data are all user-submitted, there is no way to be sure that they are accurate, and there will be some job titles, positions, or companies for which the number of submitted data points is very low, so you may have to take this information with a grain of salt (if you believe statistics and data reliability). However, where they do exist and do appear to be in a high enough number to be reliable (such as the link above that will show you data based on 1,600 salary postings by people who work at Esri), these data can tell you a lot about what you can (or should) expect to earn in a specific geography, for a specific job title, or at a specific company.


## "Commensurate with Experience"

Now that you have done your market research to know what people **should** be paid for a given job title, in a given location, or at a given company, you read deeper. You see that there is not a salary posted on the job ad (unless it is a government job, or an otherwise hourly/contract job) and you see that "Salary is commensurate with experience." What does this mean you ask yourself? I have little to no experience since I am just graduating from College, so what will I get? Good question. Unfortunately, there is not a good answer. The company is looking to get the best person for as cheap as possible. You will be an expense, that hopefully makes the organization money (at a for profit organization anyway). Number 1, they need a person who can do the job duties and handle the responsibilities. If there are multiple people who can fit that bill, they have two options: (1) Pick the absolute best one and pay them whatever they want since they will be a rock star; or (2) Pick the one that is the cheapest since all of the finalists can do the job. Speaking from experience, I and most other people would pick the best one, but there are organizations that are tight on cash and would pick the cheapest one since again, "anyone of these candidates can do the work."

General rules of thumb(s): If you meet the qualifications, can handle the duties and responsibilities, and can demonstrate both by having done it before at another organization (aka your prior experience was the same job), you have the "commensurate experience" to rightfully expect the average salary that you found on Glassdoor for this position. If you have done this job for years already somewhere else, you should expect higher than the average. If this is the first job that you are every applying for, and/or are pretty sure you know most of the words in the job description but have not actually ever done them all, you should expect the average you see on Glassdoor to be on the high end of what you can expect. As a new grad, you will likely not have as much professional work experience as other people already in the industry who are applying to the same job, so you will not look as good as they do, and companies will know this and "commensure" will be with your little amount of experience. If you are lucky enough to have had one or more internships, or have worked with a professor for a few years, and most importantly - **have deliverables or outputs that you can show** - you should expect right in the meat of the average salary for this region, title, and industry.


## The Titles

As discussed in detail [elsewhere in this class](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/03.md#job-titles), job titles often do not mean that much beyond general rules of thumb that are violated more than they are true. GIS Technician, GIS Analyst, and GIS Specialist are all likely to mean the same actual work. GIS Developer and GIS Administrator, both different and probably mean something specific. Companies like Esri have completely different job titles than every other company (aside from software companies), so you will not know what any of those mean without digging deeper. In general, you should look at all job titles because they are used interchangeable by different companies and industries, and you will not really know what a job posting is looking for without reading the full job ad. 


## The Duties/Responsibilities

This section of the job will state what you will be expected to do each day when you show up to work. This section will often be in the form of "Position XYZ will be responsible for thing 1, thing 2, thing 3." 

Here is an example from an Esri job posting for [ArcGIS Analyst in Charlotte, NC](https://www.glassdoor.com/job-listing/arcgis-analyst-esri-JV_IC1138644_KO0,14_KE15,19.htm?jl=2938383627&ctt=1537707840089&srs=EI_JOBS):



*   Provide high-quality technical support and customer service to Esri end users through effective communication (via phone, e-mail, and chat) and efficient troubleshooting
*   Resolve technical issues related to ArcGIS Desktop, ArcGIS Online, ArcGIS Enterprise, ArcGIS Pro, and enterprise geodatabases using Esri tools and other related technologies
*   Work well in a high energy, fast paced, enthusiastic, positive, and collaborative culture
*   Maintain comprehensive case documentation in customer relationship management (CRM) system
*   As a subject matter expert, author and tech edit knowledge articles available to internal and external users
*   Identify issues and log defects for software improvements
*   Work in other technical areas of software support as customer and business needs require

Here is an example from Pattern Energy Group for a [GIS Specialist in Houston, TX](https://www.glassdoor.com/job-listing/gis-specialist-pattern-energy-group-JV_IC1140171_KO0,14_KE15,35.htm?jl=2854703948&ctt=1537708074882):



*   Utilize existing GIS data to organize and maintain project geodatabases
*   Aid in the creation of project maps for various departments including Land, Environmental, Development, Meteorology and Engineering/Construction.
*   Maintain land lease information through legal description analysis and creating polygons
*   Support regular project GIS infrastructure updates within databases
*   Assist in regular updates of project layer files within the project ArcGIS Portal.

As you can hopefully see, duties and responsibilities are usually listed in the form of:



*   Verb - thing with technical words - sometimes more context
*   Verb - thing with technical words - sometimes more context 
*   Verb - thing with technical words - sometimes more context
*   "Other duties as assigned"

Some positions will list soft skills as duties and responsibilities - "Work well in a high energy, fast paced, enthusiastic, positive, and collaborative culture" -  but for technical positions (aka non sales), these are most commonly seen in the qualifications section.

This list of duties and responsibilities should hopefully be a majority listing of things that you would enjoy doing, or at least hate little enough so that someone paying you to do them will be worth it. Why? Because what you see is what the job is (or should be). It is likely that these bullet points came from more than one person because many organizations put a hiring team together who have met several times and argued with each other about what should be listed as the duties and qualifications. You should expect that some of the duties and responsibilities listed will take up more time than others, though this may not be listed explicitly in the job advertisement. Keep in mind that the job ad is not a contract, so you may show up to work and find that your distribution efforts is not equally placed down the list of duties. This is something that you should find out during the interview process, so you should know what your duties will be (in priority order) before deciding to accept a position.

As you are scanning job ads in your job hunting process, you should critically assess your ability to perform each of the duties listed. On a scale of zero - you have never heard of it before - to five - you have done this many times - where do you fall? Could you show up at a new desk in a new office and do it today? Do you know how to do a very well (you have done it many times before)? Do you know what it means but have never done it before? Have you never even heard of what they are asking before? Everyone will fall somewhere in here, across all of the duties listed. It is not likely that new graduates have done everything listed in the duties on multiple occasions and could sit down with a new computer and make it happen today. Employers know this about new grads. They are not expecting you to have five years of experience in all of these duties, since they are looking at you - a new grad with little if any experience - for this position. You should definitely apply to jobs where you at least know what the words mean, even though you may not have done that kind of thing for those specific fields. 

For example: "Aid in the creation of project maps for various departments including Land, Environmental, Development, Meteorology and Engineering/Construction." 

Anyone graduating from our department should be able to "aid in the creation of project maps", though you likely have not done it for "Land, Environmental, Development, Meteorology and Engineering/Construction." Good thing - maps are maps. Once you have the skills to make them, you should be able to apply them to anything. Sure, it will take you a minute to learn what specific and special things are needed for "Land", or "Engineering/Construction", but you will figure it out. That's why you spent some much time and money, did all those labs and homeworks, and got a degree - to be able to use geography and geospatial technologies to solve people's problems. 


## The Qualifications

This section will list the things they are expecting about you - usually categorized into education they wish you to have, years of prior experience with technical things or in a similar position, soft skills that you should have, and specific certifications that you might need. Some job ads will break these up into specific categories and possibly separate knowledge, skills, and abilities into separate lists along with other lists. For many jobs, if "Knowledge" and "Skills" are broken up into two sections, one will be soft skills and the other will be technical, though you will see that no two job ads follow any apparent rules. You should expect no rhyme or reason to how a hiring team or an HR person wrote a job ad. Each one will be a snowflake unique and different from every other snowflake (job ad).

In all cases, you should be prepared to read a list of technical and non-technical things and assess if you have these required (must have) and desired (nice to have) things. "Required" typically means that if you do not meet these expectations, you will not be considered. "Desired" means that if all candidates score equally well, having these extras will put you over the top and make you the best candidate.

### Required Work Experience
There will be statement about this in every job ad. Typical statements are things like "0-2 years of experience working as a GIS specialist", "3-5 years as a Geospatial Analyst", "5 years in a local government GIS role", or "5+ years in a leadership position". These often state a number of years in a specific field, which will be related to that of the job ad. 

What number of years experience should you list as a graduating student? Great question. This number is **definitely not** the same number of years that you have been in school. If you are lucky enough to graduate with your undergrad degree from TAMU GIST or GEOG in four years, you **DO NOT** now have four years of work experience that you should list on your resume or consider yourself as qualified for jobs that require this amount of time. People receiving your resume will be looking for years of **professional experience**, meaning someone paid you to do the job. No one paid you to be in school or do your labs and homeworks, so if you include these as years, you are not being truthful.

What about if you had an internship? What if you worked for a professor? Great questions. Let's think it through - it was definitely professional experience so it should count. An internship was probably not for a year (more like 10 weeks) and a student job was only for 20 hours a week, so how should you count them? Do two internships in two different summers count as two years? Do two years of part-time work for a professor count at one year?

Good thing - Most jobs do not ask you to list number of years of experience when applying to a job. **YOU** decide if you match the years of work experience, and **YOU** write and format your resume to show off things that should count as work experience upon review by a potential employer. The key thing is that you actually have the skills to do the job. If there are any portions of the resume and job searching process that you should consider loosey-goosey, years of experience would be up at the top. You definitely have to use your head though. Do not apply for a job requiring 5 years of experience after graduating with no internships. Had two internships, though? You should be fine applying for a job that requires 2 years of experience. Worked for a professor in her lab for two years, same. The potential employers will be the ones that look at your resume with your accomplishments listed and decide if you have enough relevant work experience to take the next step to talk to you.

### Hard Skills (Technical Skills, Abilities, etc.)
Every job ad will list some kind of technical skills that you need to be able to demonstrate your are capable of doing. These may be lists of technologies "3 years ArcMap experience", "Experience with Esri Network Analyst", lists of programming languages "2 years experience with Javascript/CSS/HTML", "3 years experience with C#", or lists of more specific or general tasks "Experience with data management", "2 years experience making maps", "5 years managing cloud services", or "Experience working with customers." 

For many of these, you will know right away if you qualify. If the job lists a technical thing by name, you should have some experience using it to be a top-choice candidate. If it lists ArcMap, you must know ArcMap. If it lists SQL, know SQL. To prove that you match these qualifications, they should feature them prominently on the "Skills" section of your resume, and highlight their use in the prior experience section that lists the prior jobs that you had where you did used these things.

How do you know if you qualify on the wishy-washy skills they are looking for? "Ability to work with customers", "Experience with data management"? For these you will have to use your imagination. If you are having trouble knowing what they mean, everyone applying for the job is as well. If a job ad underspecifies what they require as a qualification, that is your cue to make it mean whatever you want it to mean that puts you in the best light. Your cover letter provides you with this opportunity - you can provide context and detailed (but short) explanations of how your background, training, and experience exactly fit (your interpretation of) what they are looking for.

### Soft Skills (Communication, Teamwork, etc.)
Nearly every job ad will list some set of skills that are not the names of Esri tools or some general or specific technical task. These are broadly termed "soft skills", since they are not "hard" (technical) skills. You can think of these as "people skills." Can you work with others? Can you work independently? Can you communicate? Can you listen? Can you manage a project? Can you manage a schedule? Can you solve a problem? Do you need constant supervision? Can you lead others? Can you think critically?

These ones are harder to show demonstrated experience with. Sure, you can have a leadership section on your resume, but that is typically done by those who cannot otherwise fill the space with experience that is relevant to the job. If you have sufficient relevant job or project experience, the leadership section will be one of the first ones to by tossed off the resume. So how do you convey to an employer that you have the soft skills that they are looking for? Phone and in-person interview. The first test will be the "can I stand to be around you for 40 hours a week?" test. This will be covered in detail later.


# The Application


## The Research

The most important thing that you can do to raise your chances of a job offer is research on the company, position, and people that you will be interacting with. You are going to have to tailor your resume and your cover letter to be attractive to the specific company or organization, and job that you are applying for, and you are going to have to talk to people at that organization. 

You should really really really spend some time reading all that you can about the organization so that you can use detailed and specific examples on your materials that reflect relevant information about the organization. Publicly traded company? You should now the history of the stock price, any recent news about the organization, and who the CEO and other members of the leadership are. You should determine what the mission of the organization is, as well as its "core values" so you can tailor your resume and cover letter to show that you share the same values as the organization. Have they recently made any major changes or gigantic deals? Be prepared to be able to ask questions about those during your interview(s).

Try to find out what the position that you are applying for at the organization actually does, or how it fits within the company and what it supports. Applying for a GIS Developer position? Look for what kind of products, websites, or data the company creates, since you will likely be working on some of them. You should look intelligent about a company, what they do, and how you will be contributing to the organization. You need to seem like you already know what the organization does and how it operates to achieve those goals, aka, like you have done your homework and are prepared.

If you know in advance the names of the people who will be interviewing you either on the phone or at the in-person interview, you should do a little bit of cyber-stalking to figure out who they are, where they went to school, how long they have been at the organization, how have they moved up the ladder, and what they do. Does it seem like they will be your supervisor? If you can figure out some information about these people in advance, you will be more comfortable when you are speaking to them because you will be able to ask relevant and questions to them about the organization, its culture, the acculturation process, or the growth opportunities, among others. They will inevitably ask you "Do you have any questions for me?", and your answer had better be "Yes."  People love talking about themselves (mostly), and again, if you do not seem like you have done your homework, and other candidates do, you will not be the one that gets chosen to progress through the hiring process.


## The Resume

Let's start with the purpose of a resume. To be clear, the main goal of your resume is to **get a potential employer interested in you**. With your resume, you are simply trying to make it past the first cut where the vast majority of candidates will be thrown away. You need to have something interesting on your resume that would make a person say, "Hmm. That's interesting. I would like to talk to this person about that in more detail." Obviously, your resume needs to show that you have the skills and qualifications that the job ad is looking for, but most importantly, it needs to have some relevant work or project experience (described using the language that match what the job ad says) that makes the potential employer do a double take. This is what you are looking for - to stand out from the others in the sea of resumes that will have descended on this poor woman or man who has to go through the first cut of resume selection.

The second, and perhaps equally important point of a resume is not to do or present something weird which throws a potential employer off of you because of a stupid mistake. Biggest mistake? More than one page. If you are just graduating from TAMU, you have absolutely no reason to send anyone a resume that is more than a single page. People who have been working in the industry for 5-7 years with tons of experience can get their resume down to one page, why can't you? Next up. Formatting. Do not include anything fancy. You might think that you have a really creative font, or layout. Trust me, you don't. It just looks weird and different from all the other resumes in the pile. This is not a good thing. You want the same professional resume that everyone else has with a clear hierarchy, appropriate margins and spacing, and consistent and appropriate use of bold, italics, bullets (or not) and other text-based eye-catchers. A solid wall of too much text is just as bad as a super-sparse resume that looks like it has big whitespace holes in it.

Now onto the part you are not going to like. Believe it or not, you should be making a separate resume for every job that you apply for. That's right, you're applying for 15 jobs this week, you should be making 15 resumes. Why? As noted, every job is a snowflake. Each job will have specific duties and qualifications that are different than every other job. Each job will use specific words to describe technical skills and tasks, as well as soft skills and other qualifications. You should use the exact words that are in the job ad on your resume, instead of generic words or the words from the last job ad that you applied for. If the job ad asks for "3 years ArcMap experience", you write "ArcMap". If the job says "Demonstrated ability to solve problems with the Esri Suite", you write "Solved problems using the Esri Suite." 

Why do this? Potential employers will be reviewing dozens to hundreds of resumes for the job posting. The first cut is "Does this person have the skills and qualifications listed in the job ad"? They will be reading resume after resume as fast as they can, scanning to check the words in the job ad off the list as they separate the "No's" from the "Yes's." You want to make this as easy possible for them, so why not use the words that they are expecting to see so they do not have to read between the lines to determine if your words mean what their words are asking for.

There will be a whole lecture on resumes coming shortly, so that's all for now.


## The Cover Letter

Not all job ads say that they require a cover letter, but all job ads require a cover letter. Huh? Yes, you should always send a cover letter. But what if it only asks me to "Send your resume to [person@organization.com](mailto:person@organization.com)"? Still send a cover letter as well. Why? The cover letter provides you with an opportunity to explain yourself to the organization, in your own words, that your resume does not permit you to do. This is your extra opportunity to make yourself shine. Why would you not take that opportunity? No organization would ever dock a point from you for going above and beyond and explain how you fit into the organization, why you are good fit for this job, how you can bring value to the organization, and how this position matches the skills, and abilities you possess, and how it fits with the plan you have for your career.

Your cover letter should also only be one page, and should cover the following topics: 



*   Why whatever company I am applying for? What about the company gets you excited and why do you want to work there?
*   What do you want to do? Use the job description as your guide and write what you want to do for a living. 
*   How are you qualified to do what you want to do? Again, use the job description as your guide, but back it up with key points from your prior experience. 
*   Why we should choose you? Or what makes you unique? Make it easy for the company to tell that you stand out from the rest of the resumes in the pile. Do you have an interesting story or set of skills that provides you with experience or expertise that is relevant to the job, the company, or the industry?


## The Letters of Recommendation

Some jobs will ask for letters of recommendation that get submitted with your application, though this is not super common for entry level jobs. All jobs will ask for a list of references. Who should you choose? Professional references. What does this mean? People that you have worked for or with. Who does this not mean? Your Priest or Pastor, your Coach, your friends, or your family. If you find yourself dipping into one of these or similar piles of people you know, it means that you do not have enough experience or professional contacts. You should at least be able to ask some of your professors, but they should actually know you. What you don't want is a "DWIC letter" - a "Did well in class letter." If the best your professor can do is say "This person did well in my class", that is not a convincing or ringing endorsement. You were so unremarkable in class that your professor had to go back through her/his grades to come up with anything to say about you? Lame. 

To help yourself, you should get to know your professors. How? Go to the things they organize (GIST mixers, GIS Day, Career Fairs, Esri events in Houston, etc). Talk to them, ask them questions. They are people. Make sure they know your name and something (related to your degree) that is interesting to you. Make a good impression. Make sure that they **remember your name**. Many professors have 300+ people in their classes a semester. If you can stand out for your incredible work or service, they should be able to write you a good letter. If not, do not be surprised when they decline to write one for you since they are putting their name on the line to tell other professional people that you are a good candidate.


# The Phone Interview

If you are lucky enough to make it past the resume culling, your next step will probably be a phone interview. At this point, the company has decided that you probably have the right skills and enough experience to be a good fit for the job. They now need to check a few things. First, that you are not full of $h!t, and have not completely lied on your resume. Next they will check that you can communicate. Next they will try to squeeze more details about your skills and experience out of you so they can be comfortable that you can actually do the job they are hiring for. Finally, they will be checking that they can stand to be around you for 40 hours per week. 

This can be a super stressful process because you may be on the phone, or on a video chat system like skype or webex. Trust me, phone will be easier than something that shows your face. You will feel uncomfortable, nervous, and anxious. This is normal. The only way to get better is to be lucky enough to be able to do it more than once. Your first time is going to make you sweat, but hang in there. You made it this far because your resume and cover letter speak strongly enough about you for them to be interested. You have made their short list, which means that you have beaten out lots of other people. You now just have to stay calm and trust that your skills and experience may get you the job. 

Be prepared. The organization has made this easy for you. They have made a list of the things they are looking for (aka the job ad). Study this like you are preparing for a final exam. You have all the time in the world to get ready, so take some time and think about what your answers will be to common questions. Be comfortable talking about how your experience has made you qualified for the position. Make a few bullet point lists that have your personalized answers to their probable questions. Make sure that you can discuss how you have experience with each of the technical things listed in the job ad. Come up with a story about how, when, and why you used a tool or did a task to solve a problem. Make notes on anything that you are not familiar with, or have not used before. Look these things up and figure out what they are so you can speak about them intelligently. Review your lists so you know them and don't have to be searching for an answer. 

What are they going to ask you? Every interview will be different, but it will go something like this:



*   Tell us about yourself? They are asking you to explain your education, and where you are in your career. For most recent grads, your answer will be the same. I am about to graduate from TAMU (or have recently graduated, or will graduate in 20XX). I am majoring in GXXX. I have taken introductory and advanced classes in XXXX. I have worked on projects using [name of thing they are looking for in the job ad]. I am looking to get a job at a great organization where I can gain experience, make professional connections, and hopefully do a great job that brings value to the organization.
*   Why do you want this job? You should say something that makes them feel good about how their organization is fantastic (for whatever reason). Then you should explain how the duties and responsibilities of the job exactly match what it is that you like doing. Throw in a little about the potential for growth that this job will afford.
*   Tell us about your experience? Here they are giving you an in to explain how your prior experience has provided you with enough relevant skills to meet the qualifications. Keep the bullet point list of qualifications handy in case you get stuck and start explaining your prior positions or experience. Make sure to use the duties and qualifications from their job ad as the words that guide your responses.
*   Tell us about your experience with [name of technical thing from the job ad]. Here again, they want to hear how you have used a tool or performed one of the duties from the job ad. Have specific examples already in hand (bullet list; be prepared) of how you have done a task or used a tool. Latch onto examples from your labs and homework assignments, and talk about them. 

What if they ask you something you don't know about, about a tool that you have not used, or questions about a specific industry that you have not worked in yet? It will not be the end of the world. You are a recent or upcoming grad. It is impossible that you have experience with everything. If you are graduated/graduating from TAMU, and you have not worked with it, it's likely that lots of other people have not worked with it either.

Stay calm. If you are prepared (aka, you have read the job ad over and over and over, word by specific word), you will have already made your own list of things that you have not used in class or your prior experience. You will have already looked all of these things up so you have a basic understanding of what they are, or what they do. If this is true, turn your weakness into an opportunity to shine. You will be able to say "The most exciting part about this job ad was the ability for me to learn and apply [name of new thing]. I have always been interested in that, but I have never had a chance to do it professionally before. I've downloaded the demo version and played with it, and I think it is really great. I've got a little bit of experience from my playing around with it at home. I understand how it works, and how it would be used, but I would not say that I'm an expert yet. I'm looking for an opportunity to become an expert in that." 


# The In-Person Interview

So you've made it past the resume garbage pile, and you've sufficiently impressed them in your phone interview. The next step will be your in-person interview. Here, you will travel to the organization to meet with them in-person. If the job is in the city you live in, you will probably not have an all expense paid trip. If the job is across the country, and you are applying to work at a big company, they will likely pay for your travel.

How long will the interview last? Depends. It will be at least an hour, but may be two full days. Large companies like Esri will fly you out to Redlands (if you are applying for a job at Esri HQ) the night before, interview you for the full 8 hours with tons of people, then send you home on a plane that evening. Applying to a small company? It will likely be an hour exactly, since they will be cranking through a few interviews that day or week.


## The Technical Interview

Some portion of your interview time will be dedicated to them asking you to discuss or demonstrate your technical abilities, aka what the job ad is asking for. For this portion, you should be prepared to discuss your prior experience with the technical things listed in the job ad, in detail. They will potentially grill you about very very specific things to see if you actually know about what they are seeking skills for. They may ask you to draw things on a whiteboard, do some actual work on a computer, or discuss your thought process of how you would solve a technical problem.

If you are seeking a job that has the word GIS in the title somewhere, or you are applying to work at Esri, you should be able to answer the questions "What is GIS"? To answer this questions properly, you should describe what GIS is, does, and allows you to do. There is no right answer to this, everyone's should be different and specific to them, but there are numerous ways that you can do it wrong. Stumbling, having to start over, or not having a clear story in mind, all would throw up red flags. You have studied this for 1-4 years, and have taken enough classes that you are on your way graduating with a degree in it, so you should be able to answer the most fundamental question: "What is GIS" without missing a beat. Get your bullet points together, get a story together, and practice it. If you cannot ace this question, you will not get the job.

You should wear the best clothes that you can get your hands on, unless you are specifically told otherwise in advance. If you ask the organization, they will say "business casual". This means suit, or other very nice business clothes. It does not mean polo shirt or TAMU gear. It is always better to be overdressed than underdressed. Everyone at the organization will know who the job candidate is - the person walking around in the suit - but that's just how it goes. Everyone at that company remembers them in their own suit, so don't worry about feeling weird. You only get one chance, so you had better get that suit ironed. Make sure that you can be comfortable in whatever you wear, because you will be nervous several times, and you don't want an ill-fitting outfit to be the reason you were ansy, twitchy, or otherwise acting weird to the point of people noticing.

You should feel free to ask in advance if they will be giving you a technical test. Simply ask the recruiter who is scheduling your interview, "Will there be a technical test? If so, with what software to do what kind of task? I would like to make sure that I am the most prepared, so any information you could share would be great." They will probably tell you, if not, at least you tried to find out. No one will hold it against you, if you ask in a respectful way that is not weird. If they do tell you, you can make sure that you know your way around those tools ahead of time. They are not going to tell you exactly what you will be tested on, but they may share some information that you can use to be prepared.


## The Social Interview

An equally important decision that the organization will need to make is: Can we stand to be around this person for 40 hours a week? This organization is considering making you an offer to potentially stay there forever. Think of this like a marriage. These people could be stuck with you for a long long time. They need to make sure you fit in before they commit. 

They are going to be trying to find out if you are a normal person who fits into a normal workplace, and most importantly, their culture. Do you talk all the time in an annoying way? Do you not talk enough and leave huge gaps of awkward silence in an equally annoying way? Did you just make jokes all the time and not be serious? Were you too serious and freaked people out? These are all really hard to judge if you do wrong, or to practice for if you do, but you can. That is the purpose of this class!! To learn to communicate!!

One way to not be overly weird, is to do a bit of online stalking before you show up for your interview (yeah, that is weird, but acceptable). Find out who the people are that you are going to interview with (ask, they will probably tell you). Find out where they went to college, how long they have been at the company, what their other jobs were. Be able to ask meaningful questions: "I noticed that you have been with the company for 13 years. You clearly really like it here. What has been the most attractive aspect that has kept you here this long"? "I saw online during my research about the company that you started as a junior person. What were the key things that allowed you to ascend the ladder to the position you have now"? "I noticed from my research about the company that you went to Syracuse. Did you have a hard time adjusting to the climate here in Houston when you moved down here"? People love talking about themselves. Ask them questions that are relevant to the job or company, and they will start liking you. This is what you want.


## The Behavioral Interview

The behavioral interview part is where the interviewers will try to figure out how you solve a problem. This allows them to assess your training: Does this person approach a problem in a normal way (aka how they would do it). This is also going to allow them to assess your soft skills, since they may either be the direct subject of the question - "Tell us about a time that you had to demonstrate leadership on a team" - or in full effect as you try to communicate an answer (aka listen and speak). You can look at the [STAR method of interviewing](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=STAR+Interview) for a complete list of all the questions that have ever been asked of anyone (or a portion thereof). These are mostly going to be of the "Tell me about a time when …" type. You should prepare and have stock answers for as many of these are you can.

You may be asked to draw something on a whiteboard. The purpose of this is for the review team to be able to assess your problem solving skills, and understand how you approach a problem. They may give you a scenario and ask you to "Draw a workflow of how you would [do some kind of task or solve some kind of problem]." You can practice this by drawing the workflows of how you have solved other problems in the past for your homeworks, labs, or other job experience that you have had. What are the input data sources? What are the analysis tricks or tools that you could use? What do you imagine the outputs will be? The only way to get better at this is to practice, so think about the steps that you do every time that you do a lab or homework assignment. Make a mental workflow of how you solve the problem so that you will be prepared to draw a similar solution, should you be asked in an interview.

You will definitely be asked to explain how and why you used [some kind of tool or task] to solve a problem in the past. This is your number one opportunity to wow them. They have just given you an opening to explain any story you want in any way you want. You have studied the job ad, so you know exactly the tools and tasks they are looking for. Weave your story around the job duties so you can demonstrate that you have done everything that they are looking for. You should have a great story already lined up (that you have practiced) where you can explain:



*   What was the problem that you were trying to solve?
*   Why was this an important or hard problem?
*   What were the potential approaches to solving the problem?
*   How did you solve it (using the words from the job ad)?
*   Why did you choose that way?
*   What did you find at the end?

You may be asked a [totally off the wall question](http://lmgtfy.com?q=crazy+interview+questions), to see how you think on your feet. These are really hard to prepare for, since it will by definition be a crazy question. Your goal here is to demonstrate your thought process. How do you look at a problem? How do you formulate a plan for figuring out an answer. How would you know if you were right? You may not get the right answer, or there may not even be a right answer, but you still have the opportunity to shine by not being rattled or breaking down. You made it this far. You are in the running for the job. Stay calm. Take a breath. Think. Ask for a moment and a piece of paper and a pen (this is totally acceptable). Get your thoughts together and prepare your argument. Then make it, and wow 'em.


# The Offer

Boom. You've done it. You successfully made it through the interview process and you've gotten an offer. Congratulations. Now you have to decide, for real, if you really want this job. Hopefully, you have only applied for this job since you wanted it (otherwise you are a real jerk, and have potentially ruined your reputation), now you just have to determine if what they are offering matches what you want. The offer may have been a verbal one, or a written to start. But you will definitely receive a written one at some point. Until you get this, the job offer is not real.

You job offer will include lots of things, most importantly the salary. It may also include a list of benefits that you will receive - health insurance, company matched 401(k), vacation and sick time, travel/relocation expenses, etc. If it is not in your offer letter, it is not a thing you are getting. Do not assume that you will be getting anything. Unless it is specifically listed in your offer letter, you will not get it.

Some organizations will want to wrap up the hiring process and give you a deadline by which they need to hear back, or else the retract the offer. This may be 1 week, 24 hours, or some other scary sounding number of hours or days. This will be common. They want you. They want to seal the deal now. You can understand their position. For you, however, you may still have other interviews lined up, or you may be waiting for an offer from another organization that you already interviewed with. What should you do? This is tricky. A company really really really does not want to wait. They want to get this deal done and move on. They most likely don't want to hear that you are waiting to hear back from a company that you would really rather work at more than theirs. 

If you are looking to play this game (pitting one company against another), you have to be really delicate or you risk losing all of the potential job prospects. This is a dangerous game and it could blow up in your face, so decide if you want to play it seriously. You have a job offer in hand. There had better be a pretty good reason why you are not accepting it outright, or with negotiation. There is no perfect advice here. Talk to your parents. Talk to your friends. Talk to your professors. Try to stall in the most respectful way possible. But in all cases, do not go off the radar. Stay in communication with the organization. It will be up to you to decide how open and transparent you want to be - tell them everything (that you are waiting on another offer - this will probably piss them off), or make up an excuse in order to tell them nothing (they will know what you are doing anyway.. C'mon, you're not the first person to ever be hired) - but keep communicating with your contact at the organization so they don't think you have ghosted them or are playing them, because they will react by retracting their offer. It has happened, and it will happen again. If you are going to play this game, you need to play it right so it does not happen to you.


# The Negotiation(s)

The easiest thing for your to do upon receiving an offer is simply to say "Yes! I will take it!!!" An organization would love this outcome. However, most people try to make it better. Organizations like this less, but are completely expecting it. They are trying to get the best person for the cheapest price, so they have probably made you a lowball offer. There could be a little wiggle room in there for the salary to go up or the relocation fees to get a little higher, but there is probably not room for stock options if they were not in the original offer. The company has made you a standard offer that they make to everyone, and as the lowest person on the ladder (assuming you are shooting for an entry-level position), they are not going to change their entire hiring practice because of you. If they have not offered you an ownership stake in the company, a yearly bonus, a 401(k), or other long-term investment in the initial offer, they are probably not going to budge on this in negotiations. 

There is no guarantee that the organization will budge on anything, but you are well within your rights to ask, respectfully of course. "Everything is negotiable" is a phrase that you will hear from time to time, and is partially true. Unless you are a rockstar, the organization holds most of the leverage. You have come to them asking for a job. They have made you an offer that they think is fair, and you are now coming back to them asking for more. You can see how this could potentially cause trouble. 

You have to be delicate and you have to be realistic. You are not going to get an additional 30% in salary. You might get 5% or 10%, but definitely not 30% more. If they thought you were worth that amount, they would have offered you something closer to that number. If the salary is far too low for what the average in that area is, or for what the job is, simply let them know that the salary is too low and that you cannot accept the offer. If they hear this enough, they will pay more competitive rates and close more deals.

If they have offered you relocation expenses, and you think you need more. Ask for a little bit more. If they have offered you anything else with a number attached to it (salary, stocks, bonuses) ask for a tiny bit more of one. Don't ask for more of everything. Pick the thing that is most important for you and ask for more of that. When choosing, you have two options:



1.  Choose something that is a one time payment, such as moving expenses. This lets you feel like you won because you got something, and does not increase the yearly cost of you to the organization.
1.  Choose your salary. This will be harder because it increases the bottom line of what you cost to the company. This will be harder for them to accept because of this.


# The Form(s)

Assuming they have made you an offer, and that you have accepted without negotiations, or that you have successfully negotiated a package that you and they are happy with, the last and final step may be some forms that you **HAVE TO** complete as a condition of employment. These will be weird legal things that you may or may not have ever heard of before, or know exactly what they mean. In generally every case that you receive these, they are not optional. If you want the job, you must sign them. After reading the descriptions below, you may decide that the organization is being outrageous and that you do not want to sign these. If you decide this, you have decided that you do not want to work at that organization, so start looking again.

What are these forms and what do they mean? Here you go:

**Non-Disclosure Agreements:** This will be a form that you sign which basically says that you will never talk about anything that you work on at the company. If you are working for a tech firm, an oil & gas company, or some other company with with lots of competition or some secret sauce, this may be given to you so that you do not reveal to the competition what it is that is going on at your organization. If you do "disclose", and they catch you, you can expect to be fired and sued for breach of contract. These are common in some industries (such as tech), and not at all in others (government).

**Non-Compete Agreements:** This will be a form that limits who you can work for after you separate from the company due to a firing, a resignation, or another action where you no longer work for the organization. In many cases, these will state that you cannot work for a direct competitor, but some of these go so far as to say you cannot work for a "competitor, customer, or other firm in the same industry." This would be quite limiting, because it would mean you have to totally change industries if you want to get a new job. The company will sue your next employer (and possibly you) for breaking this contract. These are not super common, but they do exist. You might think twice about working for a company that has these because they will be basically holding you captive.

**Intellectual Property Ownership:** This will be a form that you sign which transfers the intellectual property (IP) rights and ownership to your employer for anything that you do while you are employed by them. This includes things that you do in your free time, in your garage. Because you will be using company resources for almost everything you do (checking your email from home, using your company phone to look things up on the internet, etc.) the company believes that they own everything you work on. For most people, this is not a problem. They are not going home coming up with more work for themselves to do related to their job, they do this at work. However, there are some very famous cases such as when [Barbie went after the Bratz](http://lmgtfy.com?q=barbie+vs+the+bratz+lawsuit). If you are going to work on stuff in your free time, and you have signed this agreement, talk to an attorney before you make any progress to figure out how or if you can separate your work from the ownership of the organization. These are very common in tech, less so elsewhere. 
