# GEOG 215 Topic: Resumes & Cover Letters

## Learning Objectives
- Explain the purpose of what your resume is trying to accomplish
- Describe the different main components of a resume
- Structure the content of a resume for a specific job
- Critically assess the appropriatness of a resume for a specific job


## Lecture Videos
### 2019 
[GEOG 215 - 06](https://youtu.be/ZWqwGOZypmo)

### 2020
- [M](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/s76BbazxnEkWvAnYIfyQReH2ZjHNFilpXU0osVHMovNVOrK7GzpC1UB6z3laSyP9.JNp6mgWEL9Z9QDoq) (Access Password: mY8?aQkn)
- [W](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/pTzP_jkP1KDgaNanK8Ovj3AnlkyGvfpawr39Qnf2hXR5pD3p4sf5yzf_AdJ4qudk.GUYAGs_AXwXY1I-o) (Access Password: 7B0V3XB?)
- [F](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/fkgs6K9hjlWoXSWC_YGLkaBGOO_TI9R3ps7wyX_x8eyE2L7uEur0QyxCz0i0_RdR.9naMSkw8LdZwCl3a) (Access Password: x0.g@u1?)


### Resume Review Videos
1. [Resume review 1](https://youtu.be/4Xc7vpwDV9k)

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/06#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/06#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session
-->


# What is a Resume For?

The main goal of a resume is to make it to the next step of the hiring process, an interview (either phone or in person). Think of a resume as the filter that the HR or other person doing the hiring uses at an organization to get rid of 90%+ of the applicants that do not meet the basic requirements for the job, or present themselves in a manner that is less professional than everyone else who has applied for the position. The person reviewing resumes will have tens or hundreds of resumes that they must sort through. They cannot possibly interview this many people, since it will take too much time. They must quickly get this number down to a manageable amount. The reviewer is searching for reasons to throw your resume in the garbage to quickly get down to a top 10 list. So, unfortunately for you, your resume must not stand out for any wrong reasons, or it will get tossed without every really being looked at in detail. There are a few common steps that will occur in the reviewer's mind, and if you create a customized resume for the position that you are applying for, you can give yourself the best shot at not having your resume thrown in the garbage along the way.

In the first pass, the person first takes a quick glance at the resume. Most likely at this point, they are looking for professionalism. Is the resume formatted properly? Is the resume readable? Does the resume look normal like every other resume, or did the person do something overly creative and the resume looks comically different than the rest? At this step, your resume may get tossed in the trash for any number of reasons, unfortunately. The best thing that you can do is have a clear, readable, single page resume that looks like a normal resume for a person at your experience level. What is normal? A resume that is formatted like everyone else's. Sure, there are some people who get jobs with creatively structured resumes that use color and sidebars. Sure, some people's resumes look like menus at a restaurant. These may work for you. If you want to include a creative aspect, go for it. Just know that some resume reviewers do not appreciate having to look in odd places for information that everyone else has in the same consistent locations.

If you have made it through the formatting and professionalism check (meaning that your resume has not landed in the garbage yet), the next step will be a rescan of your resume to look for through your experience, qualifications, and skills in more detail to see if you check all of the boxes for duties and qualifications that are listed in the job ad. Again, the reviewer is looking for reasons on each resume to throw it in the garbage (since they need to get down to a top 10 list of candidates as quickly as possible). You need to make it easy for the reviewer to see without having to read every word that you meet the qualifications for the position and can accomplish the duties as listed in the job ad. Luckily for you, the organization has listed exactly what they are looking for in the job ad, and you have had all the time in the world to reformat and update your resume to list your experience using the exact words from the job ad. If you have done this, the reviewer will be able to quickly scan the titles of the jobs you have had or projects you have worked on and pick out the exact words that are used in the job ad. They should be going through their mental checklist crossing off each of the duties and qualifications listed in the ad as they see them in the prior experience details (2 line descriptions) and skills sections of your resume. If you have taken the time to tailor your resume using the words from the job ad, you will hopefully make it through this culling step where the reviewer is simply trying to get rid of the resumes that do not meet the minimum qualifications for the position. Again, the reviewer is looking for any reasons to throw your resume in the garbage, so they can get down to a top 10 list as fast as they possibly can. Use the words from the job ad on your resume, so you can present yourself as a person who meets the minimum qualifications and make it onto the next step.

At this point, the reviewer will likely have gotten rid of 75%+ of the resumes they were sent either because of formatting problems (resumes that look unprofessional), or because the candidates did not list that they had the skills or prior experience to show that they were qualified for the job or could accomplish the listed job duties. Unfortunately, the reviewer has probably been instructed to "come up with a top 10 list", and they likely still have more than 10 resumes remaining in their "maybe pile." Now the real reading begins. From here on, every word matters. The reviewer has a list of 15, 20, or 30+ resumes that all look professional, and all meet the minimum qualifications for the position. They now have to decide which ones are the best ones, which means they have to do a ranking of some kind. Each reviewer will have a different way of scoring resumes, but everyone will have one. Again, they have to get their list down to a reasonable number (like 10). In order for yours to be in the top 10, it means that 20+ oher resumes that all meet the qualifications have to be removed from the top 10. 

The reviewer will now look very closely at your "Related Work and Project Experience" to carefully inspect the organizations you have worked for ("Have I ever heard of that place"?), as well as the detailed description of what you say you did while you were there or while you worked on that project. The employer HAS LISTED WHAT THE JOB DUTIES WILL BE in the job ad. Should it come as a surprise to you that they will be putting people into the top 10 who have already done what they are asking the new hire to do? Hopefully not. The employer wants to take the least risk possible when investing to hire a new person. So they want to be sure, at a minimum, that the person can do the job they are being hired for. If your resume has used the words that make up the duties and qualifications from the job as parts of your descriptive text which describes each of your prior work and project experiences, you will be making it super easy for them to understand that you are qualified for this position. 

Think of the list of duties and qualifications listed in a job ad as an actual checklist. The more that your resume checks the boxes on this list, the higher your score. The highest resume scores make it into the top 10. MAKE IT EASY for the reviewer to check the boxes next to each of the job ad items by using the words from the job ad in your descriptions of your prior experience and your skills section. Do not copy and paste, because this will make you look like you did. Instead you have to craft a very short story (many times not even using full sentences) that places the words from the job ad onto your resume in a way that describes how your experience gave you an opportunity to do them.

In many instances, the person doing the resume culling is not who your actual boss will be. Instead it is an HR person who knows nothing about the position or the tools, data, or analysis that the position uses or does. This type of reviewer will be looking for the EXACT words from the job ad on your resume since they do not know all of the other words that mean the same thing. Esri, ArcGIS, ArcMap, and ArcGIS Pro might all mean the same thing to you, but to a person who has never and will never do any kind of geospatial processing, these are four totally different things. If the ad asks for Esri and you list ArcGIS, you may have just disqualified yourself because the HR person reviewing your resume does not know that they actually mean the same thing. You must use the EXACT words from the job ad in your resume (experience descriptions and skills sections) to avoid this situation where a non-expert disqualifies you from the job because they simply do not know what the technical words mean.

You may think that the point of a resume is to get a person to remember you. This may or may not be the case. The for sure, 100%, main point of a resume is to survive the culling. After having reviewed 100+ resumes for the same position in an hour, it is quite likely that the reviewer has started zoning out with one resume looking exactly like every other resume. In the first pass, it is likely that the reviewer does not even look at the name, instead looking for eye-irritating formatting as a reason to throw resumes in the garbage. In the second pass, when checking that a resume matches the minimum requirements, it is also probable that they still do not even look at your name. Instead, they are doing mental checklists in their mind - "Esri, check; SQL, check; Teamwork, check, ArcGIS Pro, no check - garbage." In the third pass, when they start looking to rank their top 10, you now have a chance to be memorable. 

In this third review, the person has probably whipped out her or his hiring matrix that has candidate names down the left as rows and columns across the top listing each of the job duties. These duties will have a weight associated with them indicating how important that duty is to the job. There will be column all the way to the right that computes the overall score for each candidate by multiplying a columns (a duties) weight by the score that the candidate gets for that column (think 0-5 scale, 0 = no evidence that a person can do that duty, 5 = strong evidence). Everyone who has been thrown away so far, magically, gets a zero in all the duty columns which adds up to an overall total score of zero.

For those candidates who remain in the top 10, 20, 25, each now gets a score for how well they demonstrated that they could do each of the duties. It is at this point, when the reviewer must quantify a score across each of the job duties to put into this spreadsheet, that you have a chance to be remembered. This is partly because the reviewer simply has to go back and forth between your resume (which has your name at the top) and your row (which has your name at the left) putting the right information in the right columns/cells. But, it is also because they will start reading in detail about what you have done (as listed on your resume) and thinking to themselves several things. Is there any evidence that this person has done this duty (a 0 or not a zero in that duty column)? If there is evidence, is it a 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5? ARe they familiar with this thing but have never done it (a score of 1). Or, has their job experience used it in the past multiple times (a score of 5). They will be critically assessing you based on the words that you use, meaning that they will be spending a few minutes thinking hard and re-reading. By studying this much, the will definitely remember something about you. They may even be taking notes in the "Notes" column so they remember these when they have to rationalize their scores of you in the team meeting where everyone comes together to collectively rank the top 10 from each person's individual top 10. Your job is to craft your resume with this matrix in mind, trying to use the words from the job in your descriptions of prior work and project experience to demonstrate that you have no zero's in your columns, and the best chance as possible to get five's.


# Parts of a Resume


## Format



*   Length - Single page. Even people with 5+ years experience can get it down to a single page. You have no excuse not to be able to do the same.
*   Margins - Not shrunk or weird in any way.
*   Header - Contact info only (if you put it there).
*   Font - Should be a normal one. Should use consistent capitalization and punctuation. If you use periods after sentences, use them everywhere.
*   Grammar/spelling - Check them. If you have errors, you will not get the job.
*   Whitespace - Do not have big empty sections of excessive whitespace. You must have some, so you avoid a solid wall of text, but make the page look full. Skills can be in a table to fill out space and not have a gigantic hole.
*   Hierarchy - You should use font, spacing, caps, and/or bold to separate headings from section content in order to make the document readable as sections.


## Header



*   Should include your contact information. Name, @tamu.edu email, phone number. Address is okay to include but not necessary, no one will be sending you mail.
*   Can be in the header of the document, but is not typical.
*   Should include a link to your portfolio.
*   Can include your linkedin profile link.
*   Can include your (public) GitHub link. Check this with Chrome Incognito to make sure it works.
*   Should use your @tamu.edu email.


## Objective



*   Not really necessary. Everyone knows your objective: You are seeking the job that you are sending your resume for.
*   If you include an objective, you will need a different version of your resume for each job that you apply for. This will be a pain to create/maintain.
*   If you are not seeing this as your full-time rest-of-your-life-position or company, do not list this or anything that sounds like this in your objective. These companies are looking to hire interns thinking of them for potential full time hires, or full time positions that will stay there a while. If they see that you want to be in a different career later, why make the investment in you for the summer?


## Education



*   Include university name
*   Include year of graduation
*   Include major, minor, and tract if you have one
*   Include GPR if it's above 3.5. If not, maybe not, but everyone will know that this means -  your GPR is low.


## Experience

Only include work experience relevant to the job you are applying for. This would be things that include mapping, analysis, data, etc. This would not include your waitress/waiter experience unless you really have nothing else. If this is the case, include only your current job, and fill the rest with project experience from your classes.

If you are short on job experience, include project experience from your classes. If you do this, get rid of all but your current job, to show that you are employable by someone.

List a project and list the things you did.

*   Data processing with the Spatial Analyst extension
*   Cartographic symbolization with ArcGIS Pro
*   Publishing data from ArcGIS Pro to ArcGIS Online
*   Web Map creation with ArcGIS Online

Listing some [common examples from TAMU Geography/GIST course homework and lab assignments](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/ExampleClassExperiences/), are a good start. **If you use some of these** you should __**come up with some of your own words**__ since you don't want your resume to be **exactly the same as everyone else's**

Description text about what you did should be 2 lines, max. Use GIS and technical words FROM THE JOB AD in your description.


## Relevant Coursework

Fine to include classes you have taken or are in right now. These should not take a ton of space. No one outside of the university knows what is taught in each class, so they are not super useful to include. These are usually included by people who cannot fill out the relevant work and project experience section, and everyone knows this.


## Leadership

Fine to include, but limit the description text to one or two lines, max. This should not take a ton of space, unless you have something really extraordinary. This section is usually included by people who do not have enough relevant work or project experience, and everyone knows this. 


## Skills

Use specific GIS product names as listed in the job ad, SPECIFICALLY. ArcGIS Pro, ArcMap, Adobe Illustrator, ArcGIS Online, Esri. Even though they all mean the same thing, the person in HR doing the culling does not know that. USE THE SAME WORDS AS THE JOB AD. If the ad does not specifically list Microsoft Office products by name (Word, Excel, Powerpoint), you can say Microsoft Office, and not list out all the products. If it does use specific product names, list those out.

You can include two lists:



*   Proficient: Something that you can start doing at a company immediately. Something that you already know.
*   Familiar with: You are aware of it. You may have tinkered with it. You would need some time and training to be able to do it as a job.


# What is a Cover Letter for?

The purpose of your cover letter is to demonstration how you are qualified for the job through a more detailed explanation of your skills and experience, as well as to make it clear that this job at this company matches the career goals that you have for yourself. Your resume will be tight on space, and you will probably find  yourself wanting to either boast about how your experience is perfect for the job you are applying for, or explain why even though you have limited experience, you are perfect for the job and it is perfect for you. 

The cover letter is your opportunity to expand on what is in your resume to make yourself more attractive to the review committee that is looking at the application packages. You cover letter will generally only be read if you have made the shortlist (top 10), so you are already in the running. Use this opportunity to seal the deal by explaining in a well-written professional letter how you are the perfect person for this job, and how this job and company are the perfect next step in your career. You MUST USE THE WORDS FROM THE JOB AD here again, but this time you have lots of space to weave them into your story to demonstrate that you are the best person they could possibly imagine for this position.


# Parts of a Cover Letter


## Format 

Your cover letter should only be a single page long. It should be single spaced (~500 words) and should be formatted as a business letter including the recipient information and the date. You should have normal margins (top/bottom, and sides) and you should use some way to indicate paragraphs, with either an indention or a new/blank line between. You should use a normal font family (arial, times, garamond) and normal size (11 or 12). You should include your signature in your signature block.


## Addressee Block

Your letter should have an addressee block stating the name of the company, the address, and the date. Address your letter to the "Hiring Committee", unless you know who is going to be reading it, then use their name and title.


## Introduction

You should introduce yourself and explicitly state the name of the job at the name of the company that you are applying to. State what your current positition is. If you are a student, say it along with your university, degree/major, and year/month of graduation. If you have a minor or track, state that. If you are a student and have a current position, say that as well. You should state that you are very excited about the position, and that you believe you are a strong candidate (or something similar).


## The Company

You should state why the company that you are applying for gets you excited, and why you want to work there. You have to be creative here. It is not enough simply to say that you want to work at the "Largest GIS company in the world" if you are applying to Esri. It has to be more personal than that. You can use information from the reviews of the company and say that you really value an employer that does those things. You have to get specific, which means that you have to do some research into the company. What does it value? How does it treat its employees? How is it a leader in the industry? How and why do you imagine that you will fit into the company culture? How do you imagine that these and other aspects of the company culture will allow you to grow?


## Your Career and Your Future

You should explain what your career goals are, and how this position at this company will help you achieve them. You know what the job duties will be, and you are applying for the job, so your career goals should include the things that are listed as the job duties in the job ad. You should not simply cut and paste, you should weave a story about how you see the job duties and responsibilities fitting into your career path.


## Your Qualifications

You should include details from your prior work and project experience which demonstrate that you are qualified for this position. Again, they have posted exactly what the job duties will be, along with the qualifications people should have for the position. USE THESE WORDS in your cover letter. Do not cut and paste. You must use real examples from your real experience that discuss how, when, and under what circumstances you have done the tasks that they are looking for in the past. What have you achieved in the past that is relevant to what this job does. When and for how long did you do a skill that is listed in the job ad?

In addition to listing technical abilities from your prior experience, this is also the section where you should discuss the soft skills that are listed in the job ad as well. These soft skills are very difficult to describe in any detail on your resume, so here is the place. Weave the exact phrases into your descriptions of your prior experience. They are looking for a critical thinker? Explain how you had to use critical thinking in your prior experience that also happens to explain how you used the exact set of data or software that they are looking for. They are looking for a person who works well on a team AND independently? Lucky thing - you have worked on a team and independently in your prior experience as you completed a project in your coursework or at a prior job. You get the idea. Blend the soft skills in as you describe your prior experience using the words from the job ad.


## Your Uniqueness

You will need some kind of way to stand out from the rest of the top 10 candidates so that people have a thing they remember about you for when they are arguing which three people to bring in for an interview. The best way to do this is to discuss something unique about yourself that is relatable to the position. The absolute best is to have a story about how your hobby or passion is related to the job, especially the company. In order to be successful in this hobby, it requires both the soft and hard skills that just so happen to be requirements for the job. 

Love baking and applying to work at a food retail company? Talk about how you have a passion for baking, and that the skills required to be a great baker are the same that are required to be a great GIS Analyst - attention to detail, ability to handle a crisis, creativity, a passion for how customers feel about an end product. Discuss how you have successfully been able to 

Love rock climbing and applying to work at Esri? Talk about how you have a passion for rock climbing and the skills which are successful are the very same skills that make for great GIS Developers - the ability to create a plan and execute it, the ability to handle a crisis, the ability to work on both a large team and independently successfully. 

You get the idea. Include something interesting about yourself that a person will remember. Tie it to the job. Say how the challenges that you have to overcome to be a success in that thing are the same skills that make for a successful employee in the job you are applying to.


## Closing

Include a professional closing. Tell them again that you are excited about the job, look forward to an opportunity to discuss your qualifications, and that if they need any other information, they can reach you at any time. Include a signature block with your name and signature.
