# GEOG 215 Topic: Internships, Research, and Other High Impact Learning Experiences

## Learning Objectives
-   Enumerate the different types of HILEs
-   Explain the purpose of different types of HILEs
-   Explain how different HILEs can benefit a student's career potential
-   Critically assess the appropriateness each different type of HILE given a student's career goals


## Lecture Videos
### 2019 
[GEOG 215 - 07](https://youtu.be/oaUBittgvlE)

### 2020
- [M](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/ieM-6BmiB0bwTXPGYW0WQFs7Ax0xS3ld52AeBVuTG3U0bE69grspAP4dY3b_s4eB.HUi439FI72evAhHR) (Access Password: 6@cF?3V9)
- [W](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/4Y0EDKNL9TeB3BgDbPz13gzwhj6kPlC8OIu51zWw8XHpFO34M4--MuEwewiqhgdx.QxbQIzALd_Hha5Od) (Access Password: zyd&?0=?)
- [F](https://tamu.zoom.us/rec/share/4RUiSm3kNfIijkNJrR7DszjRdeAsTpDzJ67PSpFhQlPM8fNL14uZkliCdSCh3jrw.f4wym-E7TiDKNpBg) (Access Password: %A%j1shf)


# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/07#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/07#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session
-->


# Setting the Stage

Internships, undergraduate research, and other High Impact Learning Experiences (HILEs) are important parts of the job getting and professionalization process. Each is beneficial for different parts of your career path, and not all are required for all career paths. Every student should attempt to do at least one of these. The people who get the best full time positions, or into the best graduate schools have done multiple in one category or across several. Each of these provides you with ammunition that you can use on your resume or Curriculum Vitae (CV - the academic version of a resume). They give you something to describe on your resume and to talk about in your cover letter where you can explain how you are qualified for something (internship, full time job, or grad school) using demonstrated and relevant professional experience as the backdrop. Your main goal in the job getting process (or the grad school acceptance process) is to stand out as the most qualified candidate from all of the other 10's or 100's of resumes and CVs received by the reviewer (or review team). For any good position, there will be tons of candidates. You want your resume/CV to show that you are the best person for this opportunity, and you simply cannot without one or more of these listed. Other people will have them, they will look better than you if you do not, and they will win the opportunity instead of you.


# Internships

An internship is a great experience that students should seek out during which they work professionally at an organization (government, for-, or non-profit) to learn many key aspects of the geospatial industry. During an internship, a student is usually treated as a mini full time employee, given some small task or set of tasks to accomplish that are valuable to the organization. The student typically goes to work each day, just like a regular employee, and does much of the same work that an entry level position at the organization would undertake. The intern may be given a small, self-contained project, or they may thrown right into the mix and be placed on a team working on a large project. Many internships are paid, but some are not. Of these, the paid internships will be the most competitive.


## Why is an Internship Important

There are many reasons why an internship is an important step that helps prepare students to get great full time offers upon graduation. The most important reason, by far, is that it provides the student with **professional experience related to the geospatial industry**. This experience allows the students to apply what they have learned at the university in their lectures, labs, and homework assignments into real practice, solving real world problems that an organization faces. 

There is a big difference between the geospatial work that a student undertakes during the completion of their degree, and the types of challenges that they will face in the real world. In the classroom and lab, many of the exercises will be cook-book style, where the students follow through a set of instructions provided by the instructor or TA, and may not really need to determine how or why they doing what they are doing. The data provided may have been already pre-processed to work out all of the issues (aka canned data), so that the student does not have to struggle with data wrangling as part of the exercise they are working through. In the real world, none of these scenarios apply. Many problems do not have clear solutions. At an internship, a student may be required to think through a problem, and determine which data are available to solve the problem and which technical approaches can and should be applied. For both data and approach, the student will have to evaluate potential options to determine the most appropriate one. Even more importantly, interns often must go and find the data needed to solve the problem. These data will NOT be pre-processed for the student; they will be dirty, incomplete, and inaccurate. The intern will have to undertake serious data wrangling in order to make the data useful for the problem at hand.

In addition to dirty data and murky problem descriptions for which students must invent a process or solution, internships provide students an opportunity to practice what they have learned at the university. As the saying goes, practice makes perfect. Though there will be (or should be) some guidance provided by the intern's mentor, the intern should be expected to create an execute a plan for solving a problem independently. This may involve delving back a few semesters into her/his memory to recall tools, systems, or data sets that were used in a lab to solve a similar problem. Interns will get hands on experience applying these knowledge, skills, and abilities to both problems they are familiar with (from prior coursework), and to new problems they have not seen before. Students will develop mastery of the skills they learned in class as they continue to practice and utilize their abilities from their classes to solve old and new problems.

The second most important reason to seek out an internship is resume building. As we have seen, the Related Work and Project Experience section is the **most important section of a resume**. This section provides students with the opportunity to tailor their resume to the job ad by rewriting the description of what their prior work was using the terms listed in the job ad. This section demonstrates to the resume reviewer that a candidate is qualified for the position. Without completing an internship, many students **do not have any professional work experiences** that they can use in this section, and instead revert to using projects from their courses. While better than nothing, students with internship experience(s) will always be chosen over those without it, if all other things are equal. Listing an internship on their resume shows that a student was successfully able to complete geospatial work in a professional setting. This is an important hurdle that is recognized when compared to other resumes that do not have an internship listed. A person with internship experience has been given a task, come up with a plan to complete the task, and successfully executed the plan. This person is also highly likely to be a good communicator (otherwise they would not have gotten or succeeded at the internship), and highly likely to pass the "can we stand to be around you for 40 hours a week" social interview test. 

An internship listing on a resume provides a prior experience section where the student can tailor the words used to describe the duties of the internship using the words from the job ad (aka make your resume match the job). Fortunately for those that have professional experience, and unfortunately for those that do not, it is far easier to get your second internship or job once you have a first one to list on your resume. Getting that first one might be hard, or you might do it as a volunteer, but once you have one listed on your resume, this is often used by potential future employers as part of the evidence that you are qualified for your next step of whatever you applying for (full time positions or future internships).

Third and finally, you can think of an internship as a **10 week extended interview for a full time position** (in the case of summer internships). You have hopefully applied to and gotten an internship at a specific organization because you think you might want to work there full time post graduation. In many industries, Oil & Gas in particular, you will not get hired at a company as a new employee unless you have done an internship there first. Companies use this strategy because it is cost effective. It has been reported that it can cost [6-9 months of an employee's yearly salary to hire that full time employee](https://www.peoplekeep.com/blog/bid/312123/employee-retention-the-real-cost-of-losing-an-employee). This is very expensive, so companies do not take hiring full time employees lightly. Hiring for a full time position is a major commitment that this company is making, so they want to be deadly serious that they are getting the right person. Bringing on an intern, in contrast to a full time position, is low risk. This person will only be around for a set amount of time (10 weeks for summer internships) and they are guaranteed to leave once the term is over, since everyone understands the term. If the intern turns out to be terrible, the company has only wasted 2.5 months of its time and money, and can try again in the future. The intern will not be paid as much as a full time position, so the actual salary dollars are lower and less risky. Finally, the intern will likely be given a very narrow set of tasks, which often can be covered by another employee if the intern turns out to be a lemon.

However, if you do a fantastic job at your internship, you have just shown the company that you could potentially make for a great full time hire. After 10 weeks, they will know everything about you that they could possibly want to know related to your professional work and behavior. They will have seen how you interact in an office. They will have seen and judged the quality of the work that you produce. They will have seen if you show up to work every day, on time. They will have seen if you waste time on social media or are uber productive. They will have seen if you can solve problems on your own, or if you ask a million questions over and over again and need your hand held through every step of a process. You are now a known quantity, for better or worse. If you did an outstanding job and impressed everyone, you should now be at the top of the list for a full time position at that organization, if one becomes available at a time that is convenient for them and for you (aka when you will be graduating and looking for a job). Even if a full time position is not available, you should be at the top of next season's intern pool, should you decide that you want another one.


## When to Do an Internship

As you are hopefully painfully aware by now, getting that first internship as early as possible is the most important thing that you can do. You may be saying to yourself "I am only a freshman/sophomore (or I have just transferred into this major). I have no experience and have taken just a few classes. I do not yet know how to do anything. How could I possibly get an internship without knowing anything"? This is understandable. You are doubting yourself since you believe that you do not yet know enough to get an internship. You are partially correct. You might not know anything about geospatial stuff yet. You might not have had advanced geospatial techniques classes yet. You might not have never worked with Esri tools before. 

However, you got into Texas A&M. You know how many people apply and do not get in? Tons, that's how many. You are at this university because you demonstrated to the admissions office that you are smart, you can learn, you are interesting. You are currently taking geospatial classes. By the time this semester is over, you will have learned geospatial tools and techniques. You will have class project and lab experience that you can put on your resume. There are outside the classroom organizations that you can join which are relevant to the geospatial industry - the [TAMU Geography Society](https://www.facebook.com/TAMUGeogSociety/), and the the [TAMU APSG Student Chapter](https://sites.google.com/view/apsgtamu/home). These organizations do have service learning projects for the community or university that you can participate in to get more experience that you can list on your resume. 

While you may not get a super high paying internship with no experience nor ton of classes in advanced geospatial things, there are many organizations that are looking for you. Many of these organizations are specifically looking for people who can be trained in the way that they do things. Some of these will be paid, some will not. 


## How to Get an Internship

Getting an internship is a long, complicated process, but it will be worth it. 


### The When

Many industries start selecting their interns for future summers as early as September. Ever wonder why the Geosciences' Career Fair is in September? Because that's when the companies that attend are looking to make their internship decisions. Yes, this is nine months before your summer internship will start (in May), but that is how it goes. These are usually the larger companies (Oil & Gas Companies, etc.), and these large companies usually have the highest paying and most competitive internships. What does this mean for you? You must attend the Fall Geosciences Career Fair. You must have your resume ready right at the start of the semester. You must get rolling on your application process right as the new school year is starting.

Beyond these large companies that start selecting in Sept, there will be a constant trickle of internships that come out during the year. The later and later it gets into the year, the more anxious you will become if you are not successful in lining up an internship for the summer. This is normal. Everyone else is landing internships, you are still waiting. You are worrying that you won't find anything. Relax. Take a breath. There will be options.


### The How

Step 1. Get a solid resume together and attend the Fall Geosciences Career Fair. Get some nice looking professional clothes on. Go to all the mixers. Get ready to stand in line and have a good story to tell about each of the items in your prior experience section. Get the card of the recruiter you talk to and follow up. Send them an email saying that it was nice to meet them, you are super excited about the internship opportunities they have to offer, and include a copy of your resume and cover letter to the email.

Step 2. If you do not land an internship at the career fair, do not panic. There were hundreds of students there, and only tens of companies. They cannot hire everyone. You next step is to start looking online. Start searching the internet life your life depends on it. Follow the [job searching links](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/03.md#job-searches) that are provided in this class. There will be new jobs and internships posted every day, so you will have to do this frequently to not miss any of the opportunities that are posted.

Step 3. In parallel to step 2, you should be talking to your professors. These people know organizations and people at them. They have contacts that they can introduce you to or recommend you for. They know where other students have interned in the past. In particular, make an appointment with the Internship Director for the department. Ask her or him for a list of companies and the contacts at those organizations where students have had internships before. Email those people.

Step 4. In parallel to 2 and 3, you can start cold-calling (emailing, actually). If you see a company that you are interested in, figure out who does the geospatial stuff there, or who the HR person is, and start emailing them to see if they have internships available. It takes 1 minute to send a professional email which includes your resume. If you really want to work at a company, is it not worth the time to send an email to ask if they have any internships available this summer?

Step 5. If all else fails, ask/beg to volunteer as an intern. Some organizations, especially those in local government or your professors in the department will accept unpaid volunteer interns. While you may prefer to get paid, this may not be an option for you if you have exhausted all others. The reason that you did not get any of the other options is likely because you had no experience and everyone else who is applying did. Volunteering for a local government or in the lab of a professor will get you that experience so you look better for next summer. Sometime you just have to work for free to get some experience on your resume so you can get a high paying position in the future. In addition, once you do a good job working for someone, they will be able to be your reference for the rest of your life. They expect this, as should you.


## Making it Official

Okay, you've landed that internship (paid or unpaid). Fantastic work. You are well on your way to a great geospatial career. You're all set, right? Wrong. You still have at least one more step to do. You should inform the department that you are doing an internship, so they can register you for [GEOG 484: Geography/GIST Internships](https://geography.tamu.edu/academics/internships/index.html). Why do you want to do this? So you can have your internship listed on your transcript. Why does the department want you to do this? So we can keep track of where our students get internships, who their bosses are, what they do for use in the future when other students ask us "Where can I find an internship"? You will be helping future students if you let us know where you worked and who you worked for so we can hook future students up with the organization and the person. Our department also has to report to the university how many of our students do internships, so we need these numbers and we need you to register for this course.

You have several options when you register you for [GEOG 484: Geography/GIST Internships](https://geography.tamu.edu/academics/internships/index.html). 

**Internship For 1 or More Credits:** You can sign up to use your internship as 1 or more course credits that you can substitute for another class in the future. The typical number of credits that you will get is 3 per internship, but this should be discussed with the department Internship Director and can be negotiated, within and for good reason. Many students like this option because they can get rid of a class in their degree plan that they do not want to have to take. However, since you will be registered for TAMU credits, you will have to pay for them. This means that you will be paying the university to do your internship, while you are not even on campus (in most cases). Many students have a fundamental problem with this.

**Internship for Zero Credit:** Another option is to enroll in the [GEOG 484: Geography/GIST Internships](https://geography.tamu.edu/academics/internships/index.html) course, but register for zero credits. This allows you to have the internship on your transcript but does not require you to pay the university any tuition. Many students prefer this option because they do not have any classes that they need to substitute credit for, and they fundamentally do not want to pay the university for their internship, when they will not even be on campus.

**Register in Summer:** If you are able to get your [GEOG 484: Geography/GIST Internships](https://geography.tamu.edu/academics/internships/index.html) paperwork completed before the add/drop date for the summer when the internship will take place, great. You are all set and don't need to do anything special. This is ideal.

**Register in Fall:** If, however, you are like lots of people, you landed your internship just in time and it was past the add/drop date of the summer. Luckily for you, our department will still allow you to register for [GEOG 484: Geography/GIST Internships](https://geography.tamu.edu/academics/internships/index.html) to account for your internship in the following fall semester. You do your internship in the summer, like you had planned, but you are registered in the internship class in the fall. No problem. The department can handle it. You should do this. However, you will need the permission of the department Internship Director, so you should contact her or him as soon as you find out about your internship to make sure that it is one that will apply (quality standards do apply). If you do not contact the department Internship Director, there is no guarantee that your internship will be accepted in Fall as suitable for zero or more credits of [GEOG 484: Geography/GIST Internships](https://geography.tamu.edu/academics/internships/index.html).


# Undergraduate Research

Participating in undergraduate research provides students with an introduction to the research process under the guidance of faculty and graduate students during which they participate in an ongoing research project, or lead one of their own on their own or in a team. This process is an extremely valuable experience because it provides students with the opportunity to apply what they have learned in the classroom to real world problems, forces them to create and execute a research plan, requires independent and team-based work, and results in a poster presentation of the results (at a minimum), or a conference or journal paper or presentation (in the best case). Students will get to know their professors and graduate students in ways that are simply not possible in the classroom, and will become experts on a specific and important topics.


## Why Undergraduate Research is Important

As noted, undergraduate research is important because it forces a student to be able to plan, execute, and report on a large research project. These are all important skills that employers and graduate schools are looking for. In addition, students will have worked closely with faculty and graduate students, who can now be professional references for the rest of the student's life.

Equally important in the position and grad school hunting process, undergraduate research will provide a student with one or more very strong "Relevant Work and Project Experience" items that they will be able to list on their resume/CV, for which they are an expert. Your research project will set you apart from the rest of those applying for the position, because it will be unique, interesting, and in-depth. You will be able to use this experience as talking points in your interview, and you will be able to discuss it in your cover letter. If your research experience results in outputs, like a conference presentation, a conference poster, or a published article, you are golden. A very small fraction of other applicants will have any of these on their resumes/CVs and you will stand out as spectacular since you do. It does not matter if you are applying to grad school or for an internship or full time position, your demonstrated experience working in a professional setting (with a professor and graduate students), on a relevant topic (something related to the geospatial industry), which resulted in a concrete output (conference presentation or poster, or journal article) will help you by being a shining star in your Experience section.

Perhaps most importantly, these professors have contacts in industry, as well as with other professors at other universities. We (faculty) get emails from industry all the time asking us "Who is your best student? I want to hire her/him." If you have done (or are doing) a great job with research for a professor, they will be highly likely to recommend your name as the answer to this question. If you are applying to a good graduate school on a topic related to what you are doing for the professor, it is quite likely that they know the people at that university doing that thing. Your research advisor will be invaluable as a reference for you for both full time positions and graduate schools. Their network of professional contacts in industry and universities will become your network. You want this.

However, not all research experiences are created equal. Not all research experiences result in conference presentation and posters or journal articles. In some labs, they need people just to wash out the test tubes. You should seek out an undergraduate research experience with a professor or lab in which you will be responsible for doing meaningful, real, research work. You should find an opening in a lab that is doing work that you are interested in, and can hopefully see yourself continuing in the future. While any research experience is better than none, you will get the most benefit if you get the chance to become an expert in something that you really like doing and hope to keep doing. 

You should pick a research setting where you will be able to make significant contributions (once you are trained) that result in your name on conference posters and presentations or journal articles. As most faculty advisors, Department Heads, and tenure committees will tell you, if there is no research output (conference paper/poster or journal article), it's like the work never happened. If a potential research position does not look like it will get an output product that you can point to in the Presentations and Publications" section of your resume/CV, you might consider working for another professor or lab. How will you know this? Look at the resume/CV of the faculty member. If they have lots of outputs with students in the past, it's more likely that you will get one as well (if you do good work). If they have none, they are probably not going to start with you. If they are a new professor who just joined the department, give them the benefit of the doubt, and ask. Be specific. "Do you imagine that this work will result in an output (conference poster/paper or journal article)"? They will say "It depends on how well you do", but you should be able to judge from their response if this is a realistic goal of not.


## When to Do Undergraduate Research

Not surprisingly, again, you should start trying to do undergraduate research as soon as you possibly can. That's right, start doing it now. You are a freshman? Start trying to get yourself into a lab. Have zero experience? Start trying to get yourself into a lab. Just transferred into the major or just changed majors? Doesn't matter. Start trying to get yourself into a lab.

Faculty realize that the vast majority of students are not qualified to work for them. You are an undergrad. You likely have no research experience, and probably few relevant technical skills either. That's fine. We are all here at the university **to help train you to be qualified**. Take advantage of us as a resource that you can use to get more qualified, to get those skills you need, to get you an important section of your resume/CV. You are basically begging us to help us do our work, so many of us will happily let you do just that. 

The earlier you can start doing research, the happier the faculty member will be with you. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to train an undergrad to be able to contribute to our labs. Just like external organizations (companies, nonprofits, and government), we want to get the most we can out of our investment. After spending a semester of a year training you, it is most ideal if we can hold onto you as long as we possibly can once you become productive. You should not be surprised (and should possibly expect) a faculty member to invite you to continue working for her or him if you got up to speed quickly, performed your work well, and were an overall good fit in her/his lab. In most cases, as an undergrad research assistant, you will not be paid. So, there is little financial cost to the faculty member for keeping you around. If you are doing great work, helping boost the outputs for the lab, the faculty member would be stupid to let you go, now that they have already invested tons of time and effort training you.


## How to Do Undergraduate Research

**Talk to your professors.** They are people just like you. You do not need to be scared of them. Chances are they got to where they are today because they did undergraduate research themselves. People only get hired at top universities like Texas A&M if they are uber productive researchers, and that does not happen overnight. They had to be trained in research, just like you are seeking to be trained in research. They understand how the system works, and are expecting for undergrad students to ask them to participate in their research. If you understand that they probably do not have money to pay you, and you are okay with this and still want to work with them, start with this.

**Do some research.** Find out who in the department does what you would like to learn how to do. There is little chance that you have had classes with every member of the faculty in the department, so there will be some faculty out there that you do not yet know. Even for those you have had class with, you still might not know what it is that they actually do (other than teach your class). Type the person's name + TAMU into google, and you will find their website along with their CV. Read their CV. Find out what publications they have produced, on what topics, and determine which ones sound the most interesting to you. You can do research with people outside of our department as well. You are not limited to faculty and labs in Geography. If there is someone doing something geospatial and great that you like in Veterinary Medicine, Computer Science, Urban Planning, Geology, etc., contact them and ask if they are accepting new undergraduate research assistants. Most importantly, make sure that they have a history of undergrad research. Not everyone thinks equally as valuable to have undergrad research assistants, so you should choose someone that has a history of working with students, and evidence that they students who work for them have research outputs that are meaningful.

**Make Contact.** Figure out when the person's office hours are, and go. Schedule a meeting. Send an email, asking for one or both. Doesn't matter. Just get yourself in front of that person at a time that is not inconvenient for them. Be professional, bring a resume, and explain who you are and what you want. If you had them for a class, make sure they remember you. Make sure to show that you have done your research and you know what they work on. Explain how and why it is of interest to you, and how you can think you can help. **Do not ask for them to pay you**. This will turn them off of you really quickly. You need to recognize that they probably do not have money for you, since they did not know about you when they wrote the grant for what they are working on (or it may be unfunded), so do not expect to be paid by them (right away at least). If they like you, think you can do a job, etc., and they have funding and an opening, they might offer to pay for you, but this is really really really uncommon. Thank them for your time and let them know that you are really excited about the opportunity to work for them, and you look forward to hearing from them if and when they make a decision.

**Look for nationally competitive experiences.** The US National Science Foundation (NSF) and other federal agencies provides funding to faculty at universities to run Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs) on specific topics. These are competitive programs for which students apply to work over the summer at a university lab typically within the US, though some are abroad (outside the US). Students should [review the list of these each year](https://www.nsf.gov/crssprgm/reu/reu_search.jsp), and apply by the deadline in order to be considered. NSF REUs are the premier research experiences that student can participate in and are offered in every scientific discipline. Since we all know that awards beget awards, participating in an REU is the most beneficial type of undergraduate research that a student can undertake. Once you have shown that you can win an REU placement, your resume is now nationally competitive for other prizes, awards, and scholarships. You obviously have to do well at your REU for this to be the case, but you will be pushed very very hard to do a good job if you are successful in landing one of these experiences. You should expect to have at least a conference poster or paper by the end of the summer, with many of the Principal Investigators (PIs) of these programs expecting students to produce journal articles as well. During these experiences, students will (typically) travel to another university to work in the lab of a world renowned researcher or research group. It is normal for all expenses to be paid (housing, travel, a portion of food), and for you to received a stipend (salary) as well. 


### Making it Official

If you are successful in landing yourself an undergraduate research assistantship, you should follow through and make it official with the university. Just like an internship, this allows you to have your research experience officially listed on your transcript, and it provides our department and college with documentation that you have undertaken research. Again, the department and college have to report these to the university because some amount of funding for students to participate is made available, so if you do not record that you participated in this experience, it is like you never did it. You do not get credit and the department and college do not get credit. Since you will be doing the work, you might as well get credit.

There are several options for students to enrol in [TAMU GEOG 491: Research](http://catalog.tamu.edu/undergraduate/course-descriptions/geog/). 

**Research For 1 or More Credits:** You can sign up to use your research as 1 or more course credits in [TAMU GEOG 491: Research](http://catalog.tamu.edu/undergraduate/course-descriptions/geog/) that you can substitute for another class in the future. The typical number of credits that you will get is 3 per semester, but this should be discussed with the the department Undergraduate Director, the Academic Advisor, and your Research Mentor, and can be negotiated, within and for good reason. Many students like this option because they can get rid of a class in their degree plan that they do not want to have to take. However, since you will be registered for TAMU credits, you will have to pay for them. 

**Research for Zero Credit:** Another option is to enroll in the [TAMU GEOG 491: Research](http://catalog.tamu.edu/undergraduate/course-descriptions/geog/) course, but register for zero credits. This allows you to have the research on your transcript but does not require you to pay the university any tuition. Many students prefer this option because they do not have any classes that they need to substitute credit for, and they do not want to pay the university for this outside the classroom experience.

**Undergraduate Honors Thesis:** Since you will be doing the work, you should strongly consider using it for your [TAMU Undergraduate Honors Thesis](http://launch.tamu.edu/Undergraduate-Research/Undergraduate-Research-Scholars-(thesis)). Any student who is a junior and has above a 3.0 GPA can apply to participate in this program within which you write a thesis as part of your undergraduate degree. Again, if you are doing undergraduate research, you will already be doing the work necessary to complete a thesis. The only extra thing you will have to do is write a version of your research report in a format that is expected by the Thesis Office. If you are working for a professor that expects you to write a conference poster/presentation or even better, a journal article, you will have everything you need to complete your thesis. All you will have to do is re-format it. This is an exceptional opportunity, because it allows you to write that you did an undergraduate thesis on your resume, which is something that no one has. This will make you really really really stand out to potential employers as you apply for internship and full time positions. If you are intending to go to graduate school. This is the single biggest thing that you can do to improve your chances of getting into a top program. An undergraduate thesis shows that you can perform independent research, and write up the results in a scholarly manner. This is exactly what graduate schools are looking for.


# Other High Impact Learning Experiences

In addition to internships and undergraduate research, Texas A&M pushes strongly on two other High Impact Learning Experiences (HILEs). These are service learning and study abroad programs. Each of these provide students with valuable experiences that help them grow, appreciate other people and cultures, and do great work that contributes to their community and nation. Students should strongly consider undertaking one or more of both of these activities in order to improve their resumes/CVs as well as take full advantage of their time at TAMU and the opportunities that it affords.


## Study Abroad

As the name implies, study abroad programs provide students with the opportunity to travel with a faculty member to other countries to perform some kind of academic experience. These are typically for-credit classes that students enroll in that have a component which is abroad, and other class requirements that take place at TAMU. Many of these programs involve both a research component and a classroom component. Most often, students must pay for the travel expenses associated with these programs, though some costs can be covered depending on the program. Texas A&M as a whole [has a ton of these opportunities](https://studyabroadportal.tamu.edu/index.cfm?FuseAction=Programs.ListAll) which include travel to every continent on the planet, and faculty members in each department run these to travel to locations that match their research interests. Students will need a passport, and luckily TAMU runs its own passport office.


## Service Learning

Service learning describes a set of activities during which students perform work both for credit as well as not for credit to complete a research or applied project for an external entity. These entities can be any organization that needs work done. The "service" part of service learning means that students are doing work to serve the needs of another organization. These organizations can be local, state, or federal agencies, administrative or other groups on campus, or non-profit organizations. In these projects, students discover that an organization needs work completed through some means (emails, personal contacts or affiliations, networking), and the student or (student group) undertakes the project either in class as a class project, or in their volunteer time as part of a student organization to which they are a member.

Service learning is a great way to build up the experience section of your resume. If you undertake a service learning project, you will have the opportunity to professionally practice the skills that you are learning in your degree program, applying them to a real world problem that an organization has. You will undertake a project from start to finish - from planning, to execution, to completion - which will show to potential employers, other professionals, and graduate schools that you can design and finish a project. You will be helping an organization complete an important work that they need done, but do not have the expertise or funding to support, thereby contributing to your community, state, or nation. This will give you an additional "Relevant Work and Project Experience" item that you will be able to brag about in your interviews, and use to tailor your resume to a specific job or other opportunity. In addition, you will get yourself a professional reference that you will be able to use for the rest of your life.

The two most common places where students undertake service learning are for semester long projects in courses, or as part of the student organization that they are a part of. In many classes, students (either independently or in groups) must find a "customer" for whom to do a project. If you can find a community group, or local, state, or federal government organization who needs a project completed, you are golden. These organizations will recognize that you are a student (typically volunteering) to do this work for them as you are learning it in class, so the stakes and deliverables are likely to not be that high. You will obviously have to complete the project, and do a good job, but they should not be expecting the level of work of a professional consultant because you are learning the materials as you complete the project for them. If you do a great job, you can expect to be at the top of the list of the organization for an internship or full time position since you will be a known quantity.

Many student groups undertake service learning projects each semester. The [TAMU Geography Society](https://www.facebook.com/TAMUGeogSociety/) is a great example of this. Each semester, the group finds a project to undertake, and provides an opportunity for its members to participate. In these scenarios, students with limited experience can get mentorship and outside the classroom technical instruction from their peers as they help to undertake the work of the project. For those with limited experience or technical skills, this is a good opportunity to participate in a project without necessarily having to lead the project or complete all the work themselves. This gives students the opportunity to practice and gain experience while doing something meaningful for the campus, community, state, or nation.
