# GEOG 215 Topic: Graduate School

## Learning Objectives
*   Enumerate the different type of graduate degree options
*   Describe the benefits of different types of graduate degrees
*   Explain the benefits and drawbacks of different types of graduate degrees
*   Explain the types of activities and accomplishments that make students attractive candidates for different types of graduate programs
*   Explain why a student should choose to pursue a type of graduate education, or why not


## Lecture Videos
### 2019 
[GEOG 215 - 08](https://youtu.be/JOPU1A1_8Vs)

### 2020
- [M]()
- [W]()
- [F]()

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/08#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/08#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session

-->

# Graduate School

For many people, an important step in their career plan is obtaining a graduate degree. There are many reasons why people choose to do graduate degrees, and these are going to unique to the person, the organization they work for, and the desired career path of the individual. These reasons may include the simple fact that a graduate degree opens additional doors that otherwise would not be accessible. For example, working at a university typically requires a PhD; without a PhD, you can cross working at an R1 (a major research university, like Texas A&M) off you career plan. Similarly, some fields are simply not options without graduate degrees. Being a patent attorney requires both an engineering degree and law degree (Juris Doctorate, JD). Alternatively, getting promoted to management or leadership in an organization might require a Masters in your specific technical field, or in a business, management, or leadership field. For other people, getting a graduate degree is all about the money. Your company or organization might have a salary structure that values graduate degrees in monetary terms, and you get a higher salary if you have one, even though you do the same job as people without it. For still other people, they simply value the prestige of being a person with a type of degree, because this is important to them. They just want to be called "Doctor". They may simply want to make their siblings have to address holiday and birthday cards and wedding invitations to Dr. So-and-so. They may be the first person in their family to ever attend college, and they want to take it as far as they can because they feel like this is important for them.

Any one of these reasons is personal, unique, and as long as it is of value to you, you should consider obtaining a graduate degree. But, do not enter into this path lightly. Graduate school will be hard, and possibly (more probably, likely) harder than your undergraduate degree. Masters and Doctoral degrees are not just handed out because you pay for them, you have to work to earn them (just like your undergrad degree, but more). Unlike your undergrad degree, you are required to demonstrate that you have completely mastered an area in order to receive your degree, in the case of an MS. In the case of a PhD, you have to show that you are the world's leading expert in your (very very specific) research field or area in order to be awarded your degree. You will have to defend your work against critics who are already recognized experts in the area that you work in. It is not good enough to simply get a C, pass  your classes, and get done - in fact, a C is not a passing grade in graduate school. You must really really demonstrate graduate-level and graduate-quality work in order to be successful in graduate school and be awarded your degree. Graduate school is supposed to be hard, and it will be. There is a saying about graduate school - "If you don't want to quit at least once, you are not doing it right." 

Despite the doom and gloom about how hard it will be, you can do it, and you can be successful. You will have graduated with a degree from a top program at a top university in the US. You are trained in your field. You would not have gotten your undergraduate degree had you not already demonstrated a basic mastery of the topics you learn in the classes in your field. You have the skills, knowledge, and abilities to qualify you to get into the top graduate schools in the county in your field. You have learned how to learn, how to study, and how to excel in the face of the technical challenges and expectations you accomplished in your undergrad program. You can do it. Now you just have to decide what you want to do, given what you want your life to be in the short and long term, and what your life and personal situation is right now and what you expect it to be in the near and distant future.

There are lots and lots and lots of graduate degree options that you will need to choose from in order to start making progress down your chosen career path. Some are right for you, some are right for your right now, some will be right for you in the future. These include choosing between, at a minimum:



1.  Thesis versus Non-Thesis (Professional) Degrees
1.  Masters Degrees versus Doctoral Degrees
1.  Online versus Traditional (Residential) Degrees


## Thesis & Non-Thesis Degrees

If you are considering graduate school, the first decision that you will need to make is if you want to pursue a thesis or non-thesis degree. A thesis degree is one that includes a significant portion of independent research as a degree requirement for graduation. A non-thesis degree is one that does not require writing a thesis as a degree component, but still may require a large final project of some kind, either in specific classes or as a capstone experience at the culmination of the overall degree.


### Graduate Certificates

A graduate certificate is typically a non-thesis graduate program. As the name implies, is where you take several classes, usually either 4 or 6, and receive a "certificate" in something. Within the geospatial realm, you will find graduate certificates in Geographic Information Science (and Technology) GIS(&T), Remote Sensing (RS), Geospatial Intelligence, and Data Science, among many other specialized programs. A graduate certificate is for "non degree-seeking" students who wish to get more experience in specialized topics, but do not want to apply these credits toward a Masters or Doctoral Degree. Texas A&M, like many other graduate programs, hosts graduate certificate programs in both GIS and RS. 

Graduate certificates offer a way for students to pursue graduate studies without having to commit to a full two to six year course of study. These programs commonly enroll students who are "testing the waters" of graduate school, to see how it matches their lifestyle and to get advanced training in specific topics. At many universities, the courses that you would need to take as part of the graduate certificate are also part of the traditional Masters and Doctoral programs. As such, these courses "count" if a student switches from the certificate program into the regular MS and PhD programs.

Graduate certificates are also commonly pursued by students who are already enrolled in traditional Masters and Doctoral programs. These students find themselves already having to take the classes required for the certificate, so they do the paperwork to get the certificate along the way, since it is often little to know extra actual classwork, just paperwork instead.

The only requirements for graduate certificates are that student take and pass a series of classes, usually 4 or 6. There are typically no theses, capstone, or other major writing assignments as requirements for the certificate. However, there may be some classes contained in the certificate which require an applied or research project with a significant amount of writing.

**Why to pursue?** Because you need some additional technical skills to get a type of job, or to be better at your current job.

**How long will it take?** However long it takes you to complete 4 or 6 classes (depending on the requirements of the program). This might be 2 semesters full time, or more depending on class scheduling or taking less than a full load each semester.

**What to expect?** You should expect to pay full price for each of the classes that are required for the program.

**What modes are available?** Graduate certificates are offered across the country as both traditional (residential) programs and online programs.

**How to get in to the best program?** Apply. Since these are non degree-seeking programs, the admissions criteria are often quite lower than what is required for other degree-seeking programs (MS, PhD, etc).

**How to be successful?** If you have learned how to do well in your classes, you already know the tricks. Study; read in advance of class; be organized; and do you work, well, and on time.


### Non-Thesis Masters

A non-thesis Masters program is a Masters program  (MS, MA, MBA, etc.) that does not require the writing of a single research-based thesis document which must be defended in front of a committee of experts as a condition for graduation. At Texas A&M, all Masters programs require 36 hours of credits in order to graduate (thesis and non-thesis). In a non-thesis master, all of these credits are made up of courses that students take, rather than some of the hours being fulfilled by GEOG: 691 Research hours, as would be done in a thesis-based degree (Masters of PhD). 

In a non-thesis Masters, it is typical for students to have to complete a capstone project, which is a large independent project that is undertaken by each individual student toward the end of their MS degree program. Though this sounds a lot like a MS thesis, it is not because of a few key differences. First, there are no formal defenses such as would be the case in a thesis degree. The student does not need to do a proposal defense where a group of experts (and the public) watch a presentation of the research plan, then vote on if it is acceptable or not. Next, the student does not need to give a public defense of the final thesis work where a group of experts again vote on if the work is sufficient for degree completion. Instead, the students perform a large, typically applied, geospatial project often similar to the type of work undertaken in an industry to demonstrate their mastery of the program materials. 

For many students a non-thesis degree is more appealing because, as the name implies, you do not have to write a thesis. They see this as a benefit because they do not wish to undertake a large, solo research project. The capstone experience is similar to a thesis, but it often does not need to be independent original research, as is required in thesis. The distinctions between independent original research and independent original applied work can be quite small, sometimes interchangeable, but there are important differences. In original research, a student is seeking to develop and test a set of hypotheses to prove new scientific facts. In an applied project, a student just has to do applied work, without discovering new scientific facts. The unknown of research is often what scares students, because it is very hard to predict in advance if research is going to be successful. An applied project, in contrast, often has a straightforward set of tasks that simply need to be done, with limited risk of failure.

A non-thesis Masters is appropriate for those who do not wish to pursue a career in research, but would still like to demonstrate mastery of a discipline. A non-thesis MS is perfectly suited for those whose organizations require an MS degree to move into management or leadership, or for those who are looking to break into an industry or field but have an undergraduate degree in something other than the typical ones associated with the field.

A non-thesis MS is not usually suitable for people who are seeking to get into Doctoral programs because a Doctoral program is a research degree, which usually requires evidence of research or research potential to be admitted. Undertaking a non-thesis MS does not demonstrate a commitment to a career in research as well as undertaking a thesis-based MS.

**Why to pursue?** Because you need a graduate level degree to get a type of job, or to be better or promoted at your current employer.

**How long will it take?** The typical time for an MS degree is two years. Some programs (like the TAMU Masters of Geosciences in Oil & Gas GIS) are accelerated, meaning that you can graduate sooner if you take a full load (two courses per each 8 week term).

**What to expect?** You should expect to pay full price for each of the classes that are required for the program. You will likely not be offered support by the university (such as a TA position), but many employers pay for these programs for their employees.

**What modes are available?** Non-thesis Masters programs are offered across the country as both traditional (residential) programs and online programs.

**How to get in to the best program?** Apply. Since these are non-thesis programs, the admissions criteria are often lower than what is required for thesis-based MS and PhD programs. 

**How to be successful?** If you have learned how to do well in your classes, you already know the tricks. Study; read in advance of class; be organized; and do you work, well, and on time.


### Thesis-Based Masters

A thesis-based Masters program is Masters degree (MS, MA, MBA, etc.) where a considerable amount of the degree program is taken up with the execution and reporting of independent original research. Instead of taking all 36 credits required for graduation as regular classes like in the non-thesis option, some portion of the credits in a thesis-based program are used to fulfill the research requirements of the program in GEOG 691: Research. 

As should be clear, the major difference between a non-thesis and a  thesis-based MS degree is the writing of a thesis. An MS thesis is (typically) comprised of the reporting of one major original scientific experiment undertaken individually and completely by the student under the guidance of her/his advisor. The size and scope of this work is usually the same amount that would fill a single scientific article in an academic publication. This work is scientific in nature, which depending on the advisor and the nature of scholarly work in a field, is often experimentally based where the student seeks to prove or disprove one or more hypotheses using the scientific method. This research will involve the creation and investigation of a research question (or "thesis") and may involve field work or other data collection, data analysis, scientific experiments, and the interpretation and write-up of results. It is not atypical for this research to comprise ⅓ to ½ of the time (and possibly credits) of the degree plan for a thesis-based MS student. If the student must travel to the field to collect primary source data, this can consume a lot of time.

During a thesis-based MS, a student will have to go through all of the formal processes required for a research degree, plus a majority of the class work also required for a non-thesis MS. The research component includes finding a primary research adviser/mentor in their department; forming a committee of professors to evaluate their work comprised of faculty members from inside and outside of their department, writing, presenting, and defending a research proposal; planning, executing, and writing up their research experiments; and finally defending the results of their research for depth and quality suitable for a research-based degree. This process is a mini-version of what a Doctoral degree is composed of, and is as such a preview of what a Doctoral degree experience will be like. 

A thesis-based MS degree is perfectly fine to pursue for those seeking to move up into the leadership or management in their organization, or for those seeking to break into a field different than that in which they have an undergraduate degree. However, completing a full research-based MS degree may be overkill for people on this path, since learning how to perform scientific research may not be a requirement along this route. 

A thesis-based MS degree is typically a requirement to pursue a Doctoral degree, however. Since a PhD is a research degree, leading to a research career, top Doctoral programs will need to see evidence of prior research experience as evidence of future research potential. Completing and defending a thesis-based MS is one of the key ways that these Doctoral programs can judge a candidate's ability or potential to perform independent original research.

**Why to pursue?** Because you need a graduate level degree to get a type of job, or to be better or promoted at your current employer. You value research, and want to get more experience in the research process. Or, you are intending to pursue a PhD.

**How long will it take?** The typical time for an MS degree is two years. There are very few accelerated thesis-based MS programs, so you should expect to spend every minute of two years working on your degree.

**What to expect?** In the US geospatial academic world, it is common for the best MS students to be offered funding by the university to support their tuition, fees, and salary while seeking a thesis-based MS degree. These students will be employed as TAs, teaching undergraduate lab and lecture sessions within their area of expertise. If you receive an offer to join a thesis-based MS program and the offer does not come with two years of funding support, you should consider other universities. You will most likely have to move to the city where the university is located to pursue this degree, at least at the start. 

**What modes are available?** Typical thesis-based Masters programs are offered as traditional (residential) programs at most universities because they require significant interaction with your adviser as they help you plan and execute your research. There are online thesis-based MS degrees available, such as at the University of Southern California and other places, but the vast majority of programs are residential.

**How to get in to the best program?** To get into the best thesis-based MS program with an offer of funding, you must demonstrate that you have the capacity to undertake independent original research. Since the only degree you are likely to have when you apply is an undergrad degree, this means that you will have had to have done undergraduate research. You should have pursued opportunities to be an undergraduate research assistant for faculty in your department, specifically those who work in the research area that you are seeking an MS degree in. You should have concrete academic outputs from this research experience on your CV, including research papers published with your professors in academic journals, conference posters, and conference presentations. To get into the best programs, you should have participated in an NSF REU program at some point in your undergrad career in addition to doing research with faculty in your own department at your own university. You should have a clear goal for the research topic that you want to pursue, and you should choose a university and professor who work on those things.

**How to be successful?** If you have learned how to do well in your classes, you know some of the tricks - do all of those. However, this is a research degree, so you must also be a competent and efficient researcher. You need to be able to formulate a suitably large and hard research question, create a plan for completing the work, actually do the work, and write it up as fast and thoroughly as you possibly can. 


### Doctoral Degrees

A Doctoral Degree (PhD, or Doctor of Philosophy in a field) is a terminal research degree in many fields, meaning there are no further degrees that can be pursued following a PhD. This type of degree is appropriate for those who are deadly serious that they would like to do independent original research as a significant component of their future careers. If you discover that you do not like doing research as part of your undergraduate or thesis-based MS degree, a PhD is not for you. If you choose to pursue a PhD, you will spend a considerable amount of time (several years) undertaking research as your primary focus. So, if you do not like research, think twice about pursuing a PhD. 

Obtaining a PhD makes you qualified to do lots of things, with the primary thing that people often think being a professor at a university. This is one of the career paths, and opens up doors to becoming a faculty member in an academic department at a college or university, an academic Department Head, a college Dean, and a University Administrator or President. Working at a university is, actually, one of the hardest jobs to get, so this is not guaranteed. There are hundreds of PhDs that graduate in geospatial topics each year, and usually less than 20 faculty positions which are hiring, so you have to demonstrate the you are the best of the best in order to get one of these jobs. Other options include working for US national laboratories (Oak Ridge National Lab, Sandia National Lab, etc.), federal agencies, and within the research units of large and small for- and non-profit organizations. For example, Esri is the largest employer of Geography PhD holders in the world because they are a research and development company that requires people to invent new ways of doing geospatial things, which is what PhDs in geospatial topics are trained to do.

The number of years you must spend studying and researching to complete a PhD is usually 4 at a minimum, with the average being 5, and many people taking 6 or more years. Unfortunately the salary you will get when you have a PhD often does not make up for the raises you would have gotten had you started working with an MS 6 years ago. So, do not get a PhD because you think you will make tons of money. While for some people this is true, for many in geospatial areas, it is not - they make the equivalent or less than someone with 6 years of professional experience in the field. 

The process for completing a PhD involves much of the same hurdles as a thesis-based masters: finding an adviser; forming a committee; preparing and defending a research proposal; completing the research; writing up and defending the results of the research. However, in many departments there are two additional steps. In the preliminary exam stage, PhD students must demonstrate through some sort of means that they are ready to start working on their PhD topic. This may include a written and/or an oral exam during which the student must defend their knowledge of the topic they intend to study. If they fail this exam, they are often terminated from the PhD program, though more than one chance may be permitted. In the qualifying exam stage, the student must demonstrate mastery of the entire field within which they intend to receive a PhD. In Geography, students are often asked questions about human, physical, and GIS&T in a written and/or oral exam. Again, if a student does not pass their qualifying exams, they are asked to leave the program, with two typically being the maximum number of chances allowed.

**Why to pursue?** Because you love research and you want research to be a significant component of what you do for the rest of your career. You want to steer the ship rather than being a worker bee. You want to come up with the big ideas. You want to do fun experiments for the rest of your life. 

**Why not to pursue?** Do not pursue a PhD if you are looking to make tons of money. Sure, there are people who invent great things as part of their PhD and go on to become millionaires, but this will likely not be you. You may actually make less with a PhD than if you had spent the same amount of time getting consistent raises every year with an MS degree. 

Sure, you can get a PhD and only teach, but why go through the trouble (in this writer's opinion)? There are many shorter and less stressful ways to get yourself a teaching career that do not involve becoming the world's leading expert on something that no one has ever heard of over the course of several years. Many community colleges will hire people with MS degrees and allow them to teach, just like a university professor. If this is what you want, why bother spending probably six years completing a degree that you will not use? Why six years? BEcause you are not into research, and research is really hard. If you are not passionate about it (meaning you probably would rather do anything other than your actual work needed to graduate), you can expect to be slower than all of the other students in your program.

**How long will it take?** The typical time for an MS degree is five years. Sure, there are people who finish in 3 or 4, but these are exceptional cases. Most people are 5-plus years in before they finally defend.

**What to expect?** You should not agree to start a PhD program if you do not receive an offer that includes a full ride for at least four years. This offer should include funds to pay for your tuition, fees, health insurance, and salary. You will likely have to move to the city where the university is. You will probably be employed as a TA, teaching undergrads in your area of expertise. If you are applying to work for a successful professor, you should expect/hope that this person has research funding available to pay you so you can make progress on your dissertation, rather than working as a TA. You should expect to work your butt off, and to want to quit several times.

**What modes are available?** PhD programs in geospatial topics are nearly all traditional (residential) programs. You will be working closely with your adviser, and you need to be in the same place where she/he is, at least at the start. If your work includes a significant field component, it is not uncommon to be away in the field for extended periods of time (months/years) as you collect the data necessary for your research after completing all of the coursework required for the degree.

**How to get in to the best program?** You must demonstrate a proven ability to complete independent original research. You likely will have done extensive undergraduate research with faculty at your university and participated in nationally competitive research programs such as an NSF REU. You will definitely have academic outputs listed on your CV (journal articles, conference paper and poster presentations). You will have already made contact with a professor who is an expert in the research topic you want to study, and you will have tracked this person down at a conference and introduced yourself and done your sales pitch so they remember you. You will probably already have presented on your preliminary research findings in front of this person at the same, different, or multiple conferences. You will probably have already completed a thesis-based MS program on a similar (or the same) topic, which resulted in a journal article. Some Doctoral programs accept people without MS degrees, but this is uncommon, and you have to be a superstar undergraduate researcher. You will have at least applied for an [NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program](https://www.nsfgrfp.org/) (GRFP) award that pays for all of your graduate school, even better - you won (you can now get into any graduate program you want). You will have written a very focused and specific research statement along with your graduate application, that is highly tailored, specialized, and lays out a plan for the research you plan to pursue over the next few years (you should use the same or a similar letter to your NSF GRFP application). You will have at last faculty who you have worked with closely who can speak to your ability to perform research in their letters of recommendation.

**How to be successful?** As many faculty advisers will tell you - "You are pursuing a PhD to do research, not get A's in your classes."  Sure, you can't fail out, but you should be spending the vast majority of your time making progress on your research. For most people, this means completing 3 empirical (experimental) chapters, each a standalone publishable research paper, with an intro and conclusion that time them all together. There are other structures for dissertations, but this is one of the more common ones. Make a solid plan for your research as fast as you can, and start cranking it out. The only problem with a dissertation is that it doesn't write itself, and no one is going to write it for you. Take organized notes as you read papers for your literature review(s), and write down every scientific step you do as you do it, so when you are done, the paper is nearly done as well. Be organized. Make a tiny bit of progress every day. Do good work. Help your adviser write grants. Apply for an [NSF Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant](https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=503621) (DDRI). Demonstrate that you are able to get money to fund your own work. Go to as many professional meetings and conferences as you possibly can. Serve your discipline on boards and committees. Apply for research competitions and best paper awards. Collaborate with people from other departments and different universities. Build your professional network so people in your field know name for when you are seeking a job at that great university.


# Online & Residential Degrees

When choosing a graduate degree, the first decision that you will have to make is whether to do it the traditional way (a residential program), where you move to the city where the program is offered at the university, or through an online degree program. Both options should provide you with a quality degree experience, allowing you to achieve your goals for the type of graduate program. However, some degrees are typically only offered residentially (PhD degrees), and there may be some life circumstances specific to you that require one or the other.


## Online Programs

Throughout the nation, there are many online programs in the geospatial field. These include certificate programs and thesis and non-thesis MS programs. PhD programs in geospatial topics are not commonly offered in an online capacity, as of this writing.

An online program from a reputable university should be just as good as a residential program offered by the same university. If you are interested in pursuing an online degree at a regular R1 (research university), you can rest assured that it is likely high quality, worth the time and money, and  you will get a good value from the program. You have probably heard of online for-profit universities that have been involved in controversy and lawsuits because they are [basically worthless](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=online+degrees+lawsuits), but any regular university you have heard of that offers an online program is not one of these.

Online degrees are particularly attractive to individuals who are already working a full time job. It can be quite difficult to quit a full time job, and possibly have to move your family to a new city to make a great deal less money than at your full time job, in order to start graduate school. You may have kids in school, a house and mortgage, and other responsibilities that make up and leaving everything behind to be a student again simply not a realistic option. For these people, online degrees are the best option, because you can typically complete your classwork on nights and weekends without having to actually be present (aka in residence) at the university you are getting your degree from. Since this is the case, you can choose a university anywhere in the nation or world that has the best program for what you are seeking.

While the days of online programs being degree factories which are basically worthless are mostly behind us, they still present unique challenges for educators and learners. Teaching at a distance, over the internet, limits the face to face contact that students get with faculty. Students often have to learn complex tasks on their own, though there are online platforms that encourage student-faculty, and student-student interactions. Teaching complicated topics, over the internet, can be challenging but can be and is done well in many online programs. Students are are the most successful in online programs have good time management skills, and are competent self-learners who tend to be able to figure things out on their own given the materials produced by the instructional staff, plus everything that is available on the internet.


## Residential Programs

A residential graduate program is the traditional way that graduate education has been taught for a very long time. Here, student drop everything in their lives and move to the city where the university offering the program is located. While this option is not suitable for everyone, it provides the most hands-on mentoring and learning atmosphere, since you can see the faculty who are teaching/advising you every day if you want to (and you don't annoy them too much). Every type of degree (certificate, thesis/non-thesis MS, and PhD degrees) are all offered as residential programs in geospatial graduate degrees around the country. For some degrees, such as a PhD, a residential program will likely be your only option in the geospatial field.

Residential programs are often most attractive to students who do not have tons of commitments like a family, a mortgage, or a career that they are already working a full time job in. Students straight out of their undergraduate degree often choose a residential program because they do not have lots to lose by dropping everything and moving across the country to a new city for 2, 5, or 7 years. These student have also probably never had the taste of working full time and making real money, so remaining a poor college student is not a gigantic life change which will cause major disruptions, heartache, or a enormous sense of loss such as would be the case for a person who has a hefty car lease payment they can no longer afford on a puny graduate student salary. There are plenty of students who have careers, do have a family, and/or do own property or other expensive things that choose to come back to graduate school as a full time residential student. These often turn out to be the best students in the program, because they are laser focused on being a great student, getting done as fast and as well as possible, and getting on with the rest of their lives. Many students straight out of undergrad do not have this professionalism and/or sense of urgency, and thus take more time to finish.

While the residential option is not the best for every student, it is the traditional way that departments have taught graduate students since they started. This means there is lots of infrastructure and inertia that will keep your degree moving along. In addition, being on campus with other graduate students allows you to form a tight cohort of fellow students who will be your friends and colleagues for the rest of your life (since you all shared the same grad school experience). Being a member of the campus community and culture is important for lots of students, and being on campus is the best way to fully experience this. Online programs attempt and often succeed at the same, but in many ways, there is simply no substitute for being there in person.