# GEOG 215 Topic: Career Planning

## Learning Objectives
- Describe the purpose of a career plan
- Describe the components of a career plan
- Describe the limitations of career planning
- Value and evaluate the tradeoffs contained in different career trajectories



## Lecture Videos
### 2019 
[GEOG 215 - 09](https://youtu.be/Ox77qzDbsWU)

### 2020
- [M]()
- [W]()
- [F]()

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/09#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/09#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session

-->

# Planning For the Future

Predicting the future is impossible. Planning for the future is invaluable. Right now, you may be focused 100% on passing your classes, getting that internship, or completing your homework assignments. You may be super busy, with very little extra time on your hands. You may not have thought about your future past the end of the week, the end of the semester, or the end of the summer. Very few people have taken the time to sit for an hour every little once in a while and think about where they plan to be next year, 3 years from now, or 5 or 10 years from now. This is not abnormal. However, it _is_ helpful to think about where you want to be in the future, why you want that particular future for yourself, and what you can and, should, and must do to get to that place. By reflecting on what you want for yourself, you can think about what steps you need to take to get to that place in your career. You can make a plan to do those steps to get to that place. People who are successful are, usually, not successful by accident. They have done these exercises, thought through what it takes to get to the place they want to be in their career, and created a plan to do those steps and get to that place.

Career planning is a very important thing that undergraduate students should start thinking about as soon as possible. Believe it or not, you have already started. You have chosen to go to a university and get an undergraduate degree. You have chosen a major and are making progress toward graduation. You have made your degree plan, and chosen the courses that you want to take to graduate. You have decided to do or not do a minor, or to specialize in a particular track within your degree. 

All of these choices will affect your future career trajectory in one way or another. Getting a degree from Texas A&M will make you attractive to certain types of professional careers that those without college degrees are not eligible for. Getting a degree from the College of Geosciences tells employers and graduate schools that you are a certain type of person who is knowledgeable and good at certain types of things. Completing a degree in the Department of Geography in Geography, Geographic Information Science & Technology (GIS&T), or University Studies tells employers and graduate schools where your interests and skills lie. Choosing the Computing, Design & Analysis, Earth Systems, or Human Systems track speaks to what type of work you like to do. Doing a double major and/or having a minor in a another field provides evidence that you can multi-task and have both a broad and deep set of talents and abilities. 

You did not get to where you are by accident. You made a set of conscious decisions to get yourself prepared to be a candidate who was accepted into Texas A&M, either as a freshman or a transfer student. You did the work necessary to get good grades to beat out hundreds or thousands of other candidates to attend school in College Station. You put thought into your college application and wrote an essay that got the admissions people interested in you. You thought about your future, for at least a minute, before you filled out the paperwork and/or online forms to select your major, or to switch majors into the Department of Geography. All of these were decisions that you made as you considered your future career and educational options, aka, you have already done a little bit (or a lot bit) of career planning.

Now that you are a Texas A&M student pursuing a degree in the Department of Geography, you are on your way to a great career in the geospatial industry. But, the planning should not and cannot stop with this. Why? There are lots of choices in front of you that will impact your future in significant ways. The things that you decide to pursue (or not pursue) will impact the types and pay rates of jobs you will get in the future, the industries these jobs are in, your ability to get into graduate school, and whether or not you pay for graduate school or someone else pays for it on your behalf. 


# Career Planning

Career planning is the process of sitting down and reflecting on what you want in your life and career, and developing a plan with a series of steps of how to get those things. Career planning includes both short and long term thinking, encompases decisions that you make now and plan for in the future, and involves goals that you have for yourself in the immediate and distant futures. During this process, you need to really take a critical look at yourself - what do you value; what do you want and/or need to be happy; what are you good at; what do you enjoy doing; what do you hate doing; where do you want to live; what kind of toys do you need to be happy; how old do you want to be when you retire; how much money do you think you will need in retirement. 

You must also be realistic. For example, everyone would like to be rich and have a boat, but at what cost - do you have to sacrifice having a family, having any kind of free time, or forgo a social life in order to get it? What does a "comfortable" life really mean, for you? Does it require a boat and a beach house, or does it mean being able to go to soccer practice on Wednesday nights for either your own team, or that of your children? What kind of work-life balance are you looking for? Do you want to have the type of career where you can leave your work at not have to care about or check your email when you get home, or do you want to be the type of person that makes so much money and is so critical to the business or organization that you must be checking email even as you are cooking dinner or laying in bed trying to go to sleep?

Given what you decide your lifestyle needs to be in the future, your career plan should include the things that you will need to do in order to get yourself prepared to be the best candidate for those things. Want to make $350,000 a year as a University President? There is a path to get you there with specific steps along the way that you must accomplish to be prepared as the top candidate when this job opens. Want to make $250,000 a year as a developer for Google Maps? There is a path that will get you there, again with specific steps that you need to take. Want to make $113,000 a year teaching in the TAMU Department of Geography? There is a path for that with steps and accomplishments you need to achieve along the way. Want to make $87,000 a year working for the federal US Census Bureau? There is a way to make that happen. Want to make $70,000 a year as your first job out of college in the Oil & Gas industry? Again, there is a path for that that will get you setup to be offered that job. Happy making $48,000 a year working for the City? Yup, there is a plan that can get you that.

Each of these career trajectories is a unique snowflake, with very specific things that you need to do in order to be competitive for these positions when the time is right for you to apply for them. Unfortunately, there is a long road between you and your dream job/career, with lots of things that you need to do in order to accomplish your goals, and only you can do them. No one can do them for you. They take work, and work is hard. They take planning and follow through, and both of these can be hard, scary, and work (and work is hard). They also take luck; being in the right place at the right time, taking the right class with the right professor; having the best poster out of all student posters just when the company that you want to work for is judging those posters; being prepared with just the right experience when just the perfect job or opportunity pops up. 

Luckily for you, you have the entire weight, reputation, and connections of Texas A&M, the College of Geosciences, the Department of Geography, and your individual professors working on your behalf to help you achieve your goals in life. You have the Aggie Network - you need to know how and be prepared use it. You have College programs that you can participate in - you need to make time to participate in them. You have all the people that graduate from your department before you - you need to know how to connect with them in the right way, at the right place, at the right time, with the right message. You have your professors - you need to know how to take advantage of what they can offer in terms of opportunities and connections.

In all instances, only you can do these things. Your professors are not going to find a job or an internship for you. Texas A&M is not going to connect you with individual alumni. The Department of Geography is not going to do your undergraduate research for you. The Geography Society is not going to do a service learning project and put your name on it for not contributing any work.

In this class so far, we have learned the value of many things that will help you along the way for a variety of paths from people seeking local government jobs, to those who want to work for Fortune 100 companies like Apple and Google, to those who want to be Professors at Universities and Colleges. Each of these career trajectories has specific requirements and accomplishments that they are expecting. Your career plan should be your long term checklist of things you need on your resume/CV that will make you the most attractive candidate for the opportunities in the future that you want. 


# Developing a Plan

Most students could probably make a detailed and realistic career plan, if only they knew what it could and should include. Without someone telling  you what the options and paths are, you probably cannot invent them yourself, since you have never heard of any of it before and you would have a hard time inventing these things in your own mind. You may be in this class because you want your instructor to tell you. This is a good start, but it is not possible for anyone (even your instructor) to list every single requirement for every single career path. Your instructor can probably do a pretty good job recounting their own career path and how they got to where they are, but not a great job explaining that of another person that they do not know in a field that they are not familiar with. Again, each of your careers will be a snowflake that is unique to you and takes twists and turns that are important only to you, and in many cases unpredictable. 

What should you do to plan for the unpredictable future using a set of experiences and opportunities that you are not yet aware of? Simple. Do at least the following things. None of these are magic. The people who get the best jobs do them. You want the best job?  Do them too. If you do not, those people will get the job that you want, and you won't. Simple as that.


# Components of a Career Plan

To develop an effective career plan, you should determine your goals for the next 1-5, 5-10, and 10+ years. These should include both personal and professional goals. 

Personal goals might include starting a family (or not, or being a great parent if you already have one), buying property, moving to a city that you desire to live in, and how old you want to be when you retire, among many others.

Professional goals might include getting an internship, getting a full time job, getting a graduate degree or other professional certificate, becoming a manager, CEO, or other leader at an organization, founding a company, getting a job at the dream company or organization that you have always wanted to work at, among many others.

We recommend starting from your long term goals and working backwards. This allows you to plan the steps that you need to accomplish in order to achieve your long term goals by taking short term actions now and planning for medium and long term actions later.


## Long Term Goals

Long term goals are things that you would like to achieve in the next 10+ years. Some things to think about:



1.  Do you want to retire? If so, when, and how much money will you need? How much will you have to make and save each month in order to make this happen?
1.  What city or other location do you want to be living in? What do you need to do in order to get a job at that location?
1.  What kind of organization do you want to be working for at the end of your career? What are the steps that you need to do in order to get hired there?
1.  What kind of job do you want to be doing at the end of your career? What kind of knowledge, skills, abilities, and experience will you need in order to get that job?
1.  What kind of work-life balance do you want to have in 10+ years? What kind of positions at what kinds of organizations will allow you to have that lifestyle?


## Medium Term Goals

Medium term goals are things that you would like to achieve in the next 5-10 years. Some things to think about:



1.  What amount of money would get you a living situation (house, apartment, boat, beach house, etc.) that you would be happy with 10 years from now? What types of jobs, at which companies, in which industries will get you that kind of salary?
1.  What type of industry do you want to be working within 10 years from now? What do you have to do to get a position in that industry?
1.  What type of management responsibilities do you want 10 years from now? What kind of training do you need to be able to accomplish those duties?
1.  What type of work-life balance would be acceptable for you 5 years from now? What kind of jobs will provide you with the appropriate amount of work-based responsibility versus non-work time that you need?
1.  What city or location do you want to live in 5 years from now? What types of organizations are hiring there, and what do you need to do in order to be an attractive candidate?


## Short Term Goals

Short term goals are things that you would like to achieve in the next 1-5 years.  Some things to think about:



1.  What industry do you want to work in? What kind of things do you need to do in order to be attractive to employers in that industry?
1.  What do you need to have on your resume (knowledge, skills, abilities, experience) in order to get an internship or full time job next year? What is your plan for doing things that will add the lines to your resume that you think you need?
1.  What city or location do you want to live in? What do you have to do in order to get hired by an organization in that region?
1.  Do you need a graduate degree or professional certifications to get a job you want? What plan do you have for getting these degrees or certificates? Do you plan to pay for them, or do you plan for someone else to pay for them?
1.  How much money do you need each year over the next 5 years? Can you take a low paying job to get great experience in order to move up the ladder at the same or different company, or do you have lots of loans or other financial commitments that require lots of money, right now?


# Career Planning Tips


## Do Some Calculating

One of the most important things that you should be doing is computing how much money you will need in order to be able to retire at an age that you are happy with, in order to live a lifestyle that you are happy with. If you are lucky, you will have some grandchildren who you can spoil rotten. Or, if kids are not your thing, you will want money to travel, live the good life, and see the world. For all of these options, you will need retirement money. There are tons and tons of websites out there that will [compute how much money you will need](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=retirement+calculator) (and have) in order to be able to retire at specific ages. You should go to any one of these, and have it do the math for you. [NerdWallet](https://www.nerdwallet.com/investing/retirement-calculator) has the simplest one at the time of this writing. It will frighten you, but it is good to know in advance, so you can start planning! It's better to know the bad news, than to be surprised by it later when you are 60 years old and find out that you will **never** be able to retire. Once you determine how much money you will need, you can work backwards from there to create a plan to get yourself that much money to live the kind of lifestyle you want to have.


## Find a Role Model

Look at the resumes of people who have the career you want and use them as your guide. How did that person get to where she/he is? What accomplishments did she/he have at which stage in her/his career? What awards did she/he win? What positions did she/he have inside and outside of her/his academic department while she/he was a student? Contact this person. Ask her/him questions about how she/he got this great career at this great organization. In the worst case, you might get to know her/him and have a mentor that you can catch up with at professional meetings each year. In the best case she/he might be really impressed by your professionalism and drive, and hire you herself/himself. She/he will at least be talking about you with her/his colleagues.


## Look at Your Jobs of the Future

You should look at jobs that you are not at all qualified for right now, but hope to be in the future. Many sites will show you the salaries of open positions, as well as people who have those positions now. If money is your primary driver, find a job at an organization that pays the salary that you are looking for at each stage of your career. You will not be qualified now, obviously, but it will show you what things you need to do in order to get qualified. Use this as your guide as you choose the types of jobs that you are applying for now. A job of the future require 10+ years Python experience? Get your foot in the door with an entry-level Python job to start adding years to your resume. A Job require 3+ years management experience? Look for companies where people move up into management quickly.


## Apply

As we all know, awards beget awards. Once you win you first one, that is used as evidence that you should receive your second, and so on. You would be surprised how few people apply for AAG awards, map competitions, student paper and poster competitions, travel scholarships, conference volunteer opportunities, etc. It is shocking how much free money goes unclaimed each year. You cannot win if you do not play, so apply to these things and give yourself a chance at winning. Planning to apply to for awards should be a component of your career plan. Most awards are usually annual awards, so you will know when the deadline is and you can plan to have some work ready to submit. You can look at the work of past winners to see what a "winning" application package could and should include. 

Example award opportunities include the following:
- [Google Search - Map Awards](https://lmgtfy.com/?q=map+awards)
- [Google Search - Map Competition](https://lmgtfy.com/?q=map+competition)
- [Google Search - GIS Student Awards](https://lmgtfy.com/?q=gis+student+awards)
- [Google Search - GIS Student Competition](https://lmgtfy.com/?q=gis+student+competitions)
- [TAMU GIS Day](https://gisday.tamu.edu/competitions)
- [Association of American Geographers - AAG-Wide Awards](http://www.aag.org/cs/grantsawards)
- [Association of American Geographers - GIS Specialty Group Awards](http://aag-giss.org/competitions-awards/)
- [Association of American Geographers - Cyber Infrastructure Specialty Group - Robert Raskin Competition](http://gis.cas.sc.edu/cisg/robert-raskin-student-competition/)
- [Association of American Geographers - Avenza Competition for Cartographic Design](https://aag.secure-abstracts.com/AAG%20Annual%20Meeting%202019/sessions-gallery/23368)
- [Association of American Geographers - Geospatial Research Using UAS - Pix4D Poster Competition](https://aag.secure-abstracts.com/AAG%20Annual%20Meeting%202019/sessions-gallery/23864)
- [Association of American Geographers - Innovative Applications of Esri GIS Technology Poster Competition](https://aag.secure-abstracts.com/AAG%20Annual%20Meeting%202019/sessions-gallery/23283)
- [Association of American Geographers - Geography, GIScience and Health: Spatial Aspects of Cancer, NCDs and Health Behavior Competition](https://aag.secure-abstracts.com/AAG%20Annual%20Meeting%202019/sessions-gallery/24698)
- [Association of American Geographers - Variouis Poster Competitions Competition](http://annualmeeting.aag.org/AAGAnnualMeeting/Poster_Sessions.aspx)
- [North American Cartographic Information Society - Map Competition](http://nacis.org/awards/student-dynamic-map-competition/)
- [United States Geospatial Intelligence Foundation - Scholarship Program](https://usgif.org/education/scholarships)
- [National Geographic - GeoChallenge](https://www.nationalgeographic.org/education/student-experiences/geochallenge/)
- [Cartography and Geographic Information Society - Awards](https://cartogis.org/awards/)
- [National Council for Geographic Education - Excellence of Scholarship Award](http://ncge.org/excellence-of-scholarship-awards)
- [Association for Computing Machinery SIGSpatial - GIS Cup](http://sigspatial2018.sigspatial.org/giscup2018/)
- [GeoTECH Center - Geospatial TEchnology Skills Competition](http://www.geotechcenter.org/2019-geospatial-technology-skills-competition.html)
- [South Central Arc Users Group - Regional & Memorial Scholarships](https://scaug.org/page-469325)
- [NASA DEVELOP Competitions](https://develop.larc.nasa.gov/)

>
> * Note: Links may be broken at the time you read this. Use Google if so.
>
> * Note: Competition deadlines may have passed at the time you read this. Check back yearly on each of the websites for the updated deadlines. The deadlines will likely be around the same time each year.
>


## Show up

Networking has to be a component of your career plan. Showing up to things is the first step in getting that great job that you want. Why? The people who will be hiring you will be there. You want them to know your name and see evidence that you do great work. You want a bunch of organizations to all want to talk to you because you have impressed them and they are fighting over you. You have to go to things relevant to the professional career that you aspire to be in. Interested in Oil & Gas? Go to the Esri Petroleum Users Group Meeting (PUG) in Houston each year. Interested in GIS? People who you know will be there (professors, former students) and they will introduce you to people who you want to know in the industry, government agency, or university that you want to be in/at. Go to GIS Day. Apply to the student paper and poster competitions so you can be in front of employers looking to hire in a way that makes you stand apart from the rest of your peers. Want to work at Esri? Go to the Esri User Conference? It's too expensive? Most of these events accept student volunteers, and they will pay for most of your travel to get there. 

Example events you can attend include the following:
- [TAMU GIS Day](https://gisday.tamu.edu/)
- [TAMU Geosciences Career Fair](https://careercenter.tamu.edu/Events/Sciences-Career-Fair-Student-Information)
- [Esri Petroleum Users Group Meeting](https://www.esri.com/en-us/about/events/petroleum-gis-conference/overview)
- [Esri User Conference](https://www.esri.com/en-us/about/events/uc/get-involved/overview)
- [Association of American Geographers Annual Meeting](https://annualmeeting.aag.org/)
- [University Consortium for Geographic Information Science Annual Symposium](https://www.ucgis.org/symposium-2018)
- [Association of Petroleum Surveying & Geomatics Annual Meeting](https://www.apsg.info/)

>
> * Note: Links may be broken at the time you read this. Use Google if so.
>
> * Note: Events dates may have passed at the time you read this. Check back yearly on each of the websites for the updated dates. The dates will likely be around the same time each year.
>
