# GEOG 215 Topic: Effective Professional & Scientific Writing

## Learning Objectives

*   Describe the importance of effective writing
*   Describe the components of the writing process
*   Describe the importance of the components of the writing process
*   Describe the key aspects of business writing
*   Describe the key aspects of scientific writing


## Lecture Videos
### 2019 
[GEOG 215 - 10](https://youtu.be/qaeW9Nlqfl8)

### 2020
- [M]()
- [W]()
- [F]()

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/10#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/10#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session

-->

# The Importance of Writing

In many instances during your time as a student, and all the time when you become a professional, you will need to communicate, to other people, in writing. For lots of people, this is a scary proposition because "words are hard." Unfortunately, this is not an optional skill. You must be able to think thoughts, start typing, and get turn a blank Word doc or Google doc into a page filled with words that makes sense and is not embarrassing. Take this page for example: It started off blank like all pages do. I had to get my thoughts together, sit down, and start writing. Then I had to let is simmer, come back, and edit. Then it simmered some more, and I edited so more. 

Your ability to communicate in writing is essential for every aspect of your current career as a student, and will remain critical as you move through your professional career. There is simply no way to finish your undergraduate degree, get an internship or full time job, get into graduate school, win an award, sell a product, or work on a team or with customers without a mastery of professional writing. 

There are many ways that you can improve your writing, but unfortunately, they are all work, and work is hard. As a "C" (Communication) class, this class is supposed to be teaching you a few aspects of becoming a better writer. The other C or W class that you have to take also should be doing the same thing. However, these are two very short periods (2 semesters) for you to be learning how to be a better writer, and this is simply not enough. Further, there are lots of you, and only one instructor, so it is likely that you are not getting the dedicated one on one writing instruction that would help the most. Fortunately, the [Texas A&M University Writing Center](https://writingcenter.tamu.edu/) is available to you, and is the dedicated operation for helping students become better writers. Most students, however, never set foot into this space during their career at TAMU, which is a huge waste. They think that their writing is sufficient, and they do not need help - they are wrong. Every one of you needs help with your writing - believe me, we professors know this. Each of you should visit the Writing Center at least one if not just to find out what the biggest mistake that you are making is. The people who work at the Writing Center are experts and will tell you very quickly what you need to improve. Clearly, not everyone is going to become an English major overnight and have complete and correct mastery of every aspect of the English language, but you can at least be informed of and start working on whatever your biggest problem is. You don't want your writing to embarrass you, and more importantly you don't want to not even know that your writing has embarrassed you and is the reason that you did not get that thing that you wanted (into graduate school, that internship, that full time position, that award, etc.)


# The Writing Process

Writing is a process, because writing is hard. A blank white page can be the scariest thing on the plant, especially as a deadline draws close. For many people, just sitting down and starting to write is the biggest hurdle because the blank white page is so intimidating. Because of this, they procrastinate, waiting longer and longer to start, getting more and more anxious along the way, until finally, in a panic they sit down and try to write the whole of whatever they have been told to write. They go at it in one big go, start to finish, maybe overnight and staying up all night. You can imagine how this turns out (or perhaps you have done this yourself - don't feel ashamed, we all have). You wind up with a document that has no structure or organization, feels rushed, has tons of typos, and probably does a 50% job of accomplishing the goal you were required to achieve. The document probably does not not have an misspellings, since Word and Google Docs will autocorrect them for you, but it probably autocorrected to a different incorrect word, so you have lots of obvious misspellings/misuses of words anyay.

You have been told this over and over and over in your life - start early so you don't have to rush at the last minute. "Yeah, I get it", is likely what you are thinking, but for real this time, you really need to start doing this. You are on the brink of starting your career so it really really really matters now. We are not talking about little homework assignments any more, the stakes are much higher. This is your career and future earning potential on the line now. If you embarrass yourself with your writing and you know it (since you didn't have time to proofread), that's one thing - start earlier, give yourself a little more time, and get that proofreading done. If you embarrass yourself with your writing and have no idea since you think your writing is fine, that's a totally different ballgame. You can't fix a problem that you don't know you have - ask for help so someone can tell you how bad your problem is, then start working your way through solving them.


## Brainstorming (Thinking)

The first step in writing is to not write. It is to sit and think. It is to get your your thoughts together. It is to think about what you are trying to accomplish with what you are writing. Surprisingly, many people skip this step and go straight to filling a blank page with words. You can tell this because their writing jumps all over the place, has not clear path from start to finish, and seems like a maze of arguments that wander all over the place. Do not be this person.

"But wait - I need to get this done, I don't have time", or "But wait - It's only an email." Doesn't matter. Take the five minutes, get a scrap of paper (or open up a note taking app on your phone) and start listing words that are relevant to what you are trying to write. They do not need to be in any order, they do not need to be an outline. At this point, you are just thinking and getting things out of your head onto paper in whatever order they come. During this process, you are simply reflecting on what you need to do, what the important pieces are that need to be included, and potentially thinking through how you will achieve your goal with your words. Your goal here is to generate ideas, and take notes of what they are. You may or may not use them all, but get them out of your head and onto paper.


## Outline

Once you have a list of ideas of what you want to write  (or just a simple jumble of words), the next step is to start organizing them. This is called your outline. Your outline simply puts your thoughts into an order that you can start filling in with the actual words that you will write. This is a very important part of the process. Your outline will create the structure of your document, and will be the main thing that makes it seem organized with a clear goal and a clear path for achieving that goal. You may swap things around as you write, but the general order of your outline should say mostly intact from start to finish of your document writing. 

For many types of writing, scientific writing in particular, there is a standard formula for what an outline should be (Introduction, Literature Review, Data, Methods, Results, Discussion, Conclusion). Hoever, the professional writing that most students will do during their career will not be scientific writing, it will instead be another form of professional or business writing. For these, the outline is less clear, and may be specific for each thing that you write. 

In all cases, you should create an outline for the simple reason that it requires you to structure your thoughts into a logical order that hopefully makes sense to you and the reader. Additionally, your outline will provide structure that you can use to fill in small chunks of writing (each of the sections), so you don't feel like you have to write a complete document start to finish. This segmentation of sections into independent components will be an important factor that makes writing the full document feel like it is doable, rather than a hurdle too high to cross. 


## Draft

Once you have your outline, now it is time to start filling in the sections. Remember how our outline separated our document into several independent chunks? Start filling them in one by one. Do one, walk away. Do another, walk away. Put words down little by little. This takes time, and time is probably short if you are like most people. Start earlier. How many times do you want to put yourself through the same misery? You suffered and spent the whole night awake for your last paper, you seriously want to go through that again? You have a phone, and you eat food, alone sometimes. While you are sitting there, start typing away on your phone so you get some words out of your head. (Getting the point yet? Start Early!!!)

Your first draft is the place where you are allowed to ramble, encouraged even. Take each section of your outline, and just start writing. It will be a mess, probably with lots of typos and incorrect autocorrects, but it doesn't matter. It will probably not flow like a single consistent document with a consistent goal and strategy. Doesn't matter. At this point you are just trying to get words into each section that you will come back to later on and tighten up. Go ahead, jump around. Write the conclusion first if you want. Write the intro last. Again, does not matter. The main goal is fill in each section with whatever you think should be in there. Keep doing this until you have all of your section completed, walking away and coming back many times. 

You will find your brain racing during this process, jumping from place to place as you walk away and pace around. You will have lots of words, topics, and ideas rolling around in your head. You will find yourself running back to your computer so you don't forget them before you write them down. You should carry your phone with you so you can take notes as ideas come to you. Always have **something **with you that you can take notes with or into (phone, paper and pen). For many people, this is why you like writing. As you get into it, your brain starts exploding with things that you can and want to write. New ideas about a section you have already written pop into your head and you go and add them in. This is the fun part, enjoy it. You just have to give yourself enough time alone to be able to work through it.


## Internal Review

Now that you have a jumbled mess of a draft together, you have to let it simmer, then go through it again and turn it into a thing which is presentable to another human. Depending on how much of a mess your draft is, this could be a very easy, or very challenging task. Luckily at this point, you should have most of the words that you need already written, and you just need to clean it up to turn it into your finished product.

The review process is where you step back from your document, and read it over, start to finish. During this time, you should be focusing on locating and noting areas where there are problems that need solving. You don't need to fix them right now, you just want to get a sense of how bad the damage is. You will have plenty of time later to go through and fix the problems, now is not the time.

You should start at the beginning and read all the way through to the end. Open up the "Review" tab of Word, or the "Comments" section of Google Docs and make notes as you read. Look for places where the writing is real bad, and indicate that. Look for places where things seem out of place or ordered incorrectly, note them. Be as critical of your writing as you can, since others will be and it's better to correct the mistakes before you send out the document and get embarrassed by it (with or without your knowledge). Everywhere you see something that makes you cringe (or that does not make sense, does not support what you are trying to accomplish, etc.), make a note that you will come back to later.


## Refine

Now that you have made it through, start to finish, you should have a very large list of errors that need to be fixed. The next step is to go through and do this. In the refinement stage, you are making your best effort to turn your big mess of a first draft into a single consistent document that is written pretty well has no obvious writing errors. At this time, you should also be fixing any logical or argument errors if your writing task required you to make these.

There will be some heavy editing during this stage. You may find yourself moving sentences around, or re-writing major chunks of things that you have determined made no sense in your first draft. This is fine. This is expected. Your first draft was you vomiting words onto the page to get it to be not a blank white page. Now you have to come through with the sawdust and mop bucket to clean up the mess and whip this bad boy into shape. Luckily, you should have most of the words you need handy, you just have to put them in order and make them make sense.


## External Review

At this point, you should have what you believe to be a nearly finished draft together. You have cleaned up the mess which was your first draft, and put a little spit and shine onto your second draft. Now is the time you ask for help. Your document is probably about as good as **you** can get it. Unfortunately, you may not be a great writer yet. You may misuse and abuse the English language and not even know it. You may have lots of embarrassing things going on in your writing that you don't even know about. It's time to let another trusted person read it, and let you know what you did wrong. It's better that they tell you, than the person this is going to be the one that finds these embarrassing mistakes.

Find a person that you know and trust, or a professional, and ask them to review what you believe to be your finished document. You will be asking a lot of this person, so you should only give them what you think is a finished version. They will only read your document once as a favor to you, there is no way they will read it twice. Do not give them a draft that is not the final one. If it appears that you did not proofread your own document before giving it to them, you have just lost the ability to ask that person to review things for you. It is not the job of this person to do your work for you. You have to do all the proofreading yourself **before** you ask someone to help you, otherwise they will not.

This person should go through your document, and since they are not you and did not write it, indicate lots of big and small errors. These could be logic, argument, and structure errors, or they could be misuses of English that you did not know that you were doing. This is very important. You need another person to review your work. They will point out issues that you simply cannot see, since you have been staring at this document for hours and hours and hours and just cannot see anything any more. This process will take them time, so you had better not be doing this at the last minute. When you are asking a person for a favor, you cannot rush them. You have to give her/him enough time to do a good job, which could be a while depending on how busy they are and how much of their own work they need to do.


## Finalize

With the comments from your reviewer in hand, you should be able to turn your almost final draft into a final draft really quickly. Go through each of the comments from your reviewer and fix them. Plain and simple.


# Common Mistakes

There are many common mistakes that lead to poor and/or embarrassing writing across all forms of professional and scientific writing. There are simply too many to list, so just the main offenders are covered here.


## Not following the process

It is extremely easy to see when a writer does not follow the process outlined above. No outline? Your writing will be all over the place with no structure or flow. No review by another person? You will have embarrassing misuses of English that no one has ever told you about that you do all the time. Start too late? You work will show it. It will feel rushed, it will be disorganized, it will have logical and argument errors (or lack either).


## Not Proofreading

Not proofreading yourself, or having an external person help you, will embarrass you. You will have lots of small little embarrassing errors, misspellings, misuses of English, etc. that make you cringe when you read your work again in the future. Nothing makes the person who receives your writing more furious than to have to suffer through reading something that was not proofread. It shows that you have no attention to detail, and that you believe your time is more important than the person reading it (otherwise you would have fixed these obvious errors).


## Inconsistent Tense

Tense is tricky. You can usually use whatever one you want (unless you are writing something very specific), but you have to stick with it. If you pick past tense, everything has to be in past tense all the way through. Present and future? Same. Whatever you start writing in, maintain it all the way throughout. This is really hard to spot while you are reviewing, so you have to make a pass through specifically checking each use of tense to make sure that they are consistent.


## Incorrect Spelling

Spell checking is a thing, use it. It is built into Word and Google Docs, use them. However, make sure that they replace your misspelled word with the word you wanted. You will embarrass yourself if you do not go word by word using the spell checker to make sure that it replaces with the correct word. It will mess up if you do not verify what it replaces with. This will embarrass you.


## Incorrect Grammar

Grammar be hard. We know this. Get help from an expert, such as the people who do this for a living and work in the Writing Center. The biggest problems you will likely run into include misuse of pronouns (he, her, his, hers, they, them theirs); the differences between who and whom; and the difference between that and which. Most people will probably not be able to tell the difference when you make these mistakes, but all you need is that one person and your mistake will have an impact on your career and life. Ask for help. People can help and train you. Most importantly for TAMU students, outside of Texas A&M "Y'All" is not acceptable to write in any professional document. While ok to send to people affiliated with TAMU, it is completely unacceptable to send to anyone else. It makes you seem like a country bumpkin. I am very sorry to have to be the one that breaks this news to you, but there you go.


## Informality

The final common error is that of informality. You are writing a professional document of some kind, it should be **professional**. Do not treat this writing like you would sending a text to your friend. You must be formal. You are trying to impress the person you are writing this thing to or for. They are expecting a professional document, make it that way.


# Emails

The most common form of professional communication that you will be doing during your career is sending emails and receiving emails. It may not seem like it, but there is are professional and unprofessional ways to send and receive emails.


### Sending Emails

Business emails (those to employers, customers, professors, colleagues) must be professional. They must have solid grammar and spelling, and usually, should not be that long. If you are writing something that takes more than 5 minutes to read, it should be in a letter, not an email. Your emails need to have a professional salutation "Dear Dr. Goldberg", a professional signature, and a professional body that is structured, short, and gets the job done. If you do not get a response is a timely manner, it is perfectly okay to respond to your own email and the person and say "I know you are busy, I just wanted to follow up on this message." Email is really hard to keep up with, and everyone knows this, so most people are ok with you sending a follow up.


### Receiving Emails

While I will 100% be calling the kettle black here, it is very important for your professional reputation to respond to your emails in a timely manner. Speaking from experience, not being capable of responding to emails in a timely manner will hurt you. No one likes to feel that their message went into a black hole (meaning they did not get a response). If this happens to you (you send an email to someone and get no response), you will typically be a little hurt by this. Do not let your emails get the best of you. You have to respond or it will not be good for you. This is really really really hard, but you have to figure out a system that gets emails answered. I do not have a solution for this, please share one if you come up with one.


### To Send or Not to Send

Emails never go away. After you send it, you should assume that it will become public at some point in the future. Once it's sent, you cannot take it back. This leads to the question: Should I really send this? If you are angry and you write an email - probably not. Save it for later, then decide if you really want to send it. If you are drunk - probably not. Save it for later and decide if you really want to send it. If it is 2:00AM - probably not. The time you send it will be listed on the email. Would you call someone at 2 in the morning? Probably not. Try to send emails at non-embarrassing times as well.


### Reply vs Reply All

Always, always, always check the to: details before you click the send button. Most of the emails you receive will be from one person, and your response will go only to her/him. However, there are many instances where you may be part of a list that an email was sent to. Always, always, always check that you are responding to the person or persons that you mean to be replying to on every email you send. This will avoid embarrassing situations and possible hurt feelings depending on what you are writing. Speaking from experience, make sure to check who the recipients are before you click send.


# Professional Letters

While you may be thinking - "There will never be a time when I have to write a letter" - you would be wrong. There will be letters that you have to write in your career as a student and a working professional. There are many, we will just cover the most common ones that stunts must produce dehere. All of these, just like emails, need professional salutations, signatures, and must have proper grammar, spelling, and structure.


### Cover Letters

[As noted elsewhere in this class](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/lectures/06.md#what-is-a-cover-letter-for), you should send a cover letter to every job that you apply for. These letters are very very very important, and must be written with perfect spelling, grammar, and structure. If you do a poor job of writing you cover letter, you will not get the job since it shows that you cannot communicate in writing, and do not have enough attention to detail to even do a good job at this simple and very important task. You will be writing and rewriting lots of cover letters as you apply for lots and lots of jobs, so hopefully you will get better and better at the content, structure, and writing which is required to excel at these.


### Personal Statements

For any type of award that you are applying to, you will need to prepare a personal statement. This document is going to be really weird to write, because you must write about yourself and how awesome you are. They can be really uncomfortable since you have probably never bragged hard about yourself, in writing, to other people before. Unsurprisingly, there is a [common structure for these documents](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=personal+statement+structure) that you can google, find, and fill in with your details. Again, grammar, spelling, and quality of writing are going to be a big part of you disqualifying yourself from the award if you do a bad job on this letter.


### Statements of Purpose

Another type of professional document that you will need to write is a "[Statement of Purpose](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=statement+of+purpose+structure)." These are required if you are applying to graduate school. Here, you must outline what your goals of attending the program, getting the degree, etc. are. This could be quite similar to a personal statement (the terms are often used interchangeably), but a personal statement is usually more braggy (when they are for an award). You job with these documents is to convince the reader that they should admit you into their program, so you have to have solid arguments. But, you must also not abuse the English language. They will be getting lots of applicants, you do not want to stand out because you could not write - you will get rejected for this.


# Scientific Writing

For those of us who do research for a living, scientific writing is our jam. Scientific writing communicates the approach and findings of science such that others can understand and possibly replicate it. Scientific writing is a very structured, rigid, and specific type of writing, which is a learned skill related to but different than professional writing. The two share many common aspects - a requirement for proper grammar and spelling for example - but differ in the density of the writing. While it may be acceptable to be long-winded and verbose in your undergraduate academic writing for class (or not, depending on your professor) or your cover letter, this is not okay in scientific writing. People have to read hundreds of scientific articles per year to keep up with their field, so they need to be able to get through yours in minutes. You have to be as brief as possible, get to the point as quickly as possible, and follow a very specific format that everyone is expecting. You will learn lots more about scientific writing in future classes, particularly GEOG 476: Capstone, so we will cover just the basics here.


# Anatomy of a Scientific Paper


### Abstract

The abstract is the 250 summary of the paper. It should include all of the key facts about what you did, why you did it, and what you found. 


### Introduction

The introduction of your scientific paper sets the stage for what your science is about, why you did it, why it's important, and what your main finds are. Often, people will only read the introduction of your paper, so it should include most of the facts that you want your reader to absorb form your full paper.


### Data

The data section should describe the data that were collected or used to perform your science. These details must be as specific as possible so others can replicate what you have done. If they use the same data and the same approaches, they should be able to achieve the same results that you have.


### Methods

The methods section describes how you did what you did. This section provides information on the approach you used, in very specific detail so that another person could replicate what you did. You must be as detailed in your description as possible to there is no question or ambiguity how you did what you did.


### Results

The results section is often a series of tables that contain numbers which are described in text that report what your experiments' outcomes were. This section describes what you found by conducting your research using the approaches you list on the data that you used. It is a mistake to write text that simply includes in words the information that is presented in tabular form as well. If words are written, they should be about the most interesting parts of the results.


### Discussion

The discussion section is not always included, or sometimes it is folded into a "Discussion & Conclusion" section. If it is included, it typically provides some insight into how and why the results came out the way that they did. Are there some interesting cases for which the approach did or did not work well? Why does the researcher think that is so. What implications do their findings have for future research, society, or their field?


### Conclusion

The conclusion section is often a semi-repeat of the introduction. Here, you again write what you did, why, and what you found. You should use different words, and create additional value in your paper, but it will basically just summarize what you did, again.


### Citations & References

All scientific documents must be based on facts. To do this, you have to document your science (data + methods) but you must also link to existing literature that supports what you do. In text citations to this existing literature must be used and placed appropriately throughout your document. The Reference section is the container within which all of these full citations go. You must use a consistent format for both in text citations and references, with software like BibTex and LaTex being available to help manage and format these citations for you.