# GEOG 215 Topic: Networking

## Learning Objectives
*   Describe the types of networking that students can do
*   Describe the role of a professional network in advancing one's career


## Lecture Videos
[GEOG 215 - 11](https://youtu.be/SS6bATPymjM)

# Pre-Class Activities
- Review the weekely lecture materials **ahead of class** (lecture content, lecture videos, additional readings, etc.)
- Complete the [Pre-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/11#pre-class)

<!-- 
- Prepare to participate in the [In-Class Activities](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/tree/master/activities/11#in-class)

## In-Class Activities
### Assessments
- Each student will complete an in-class activity assessing pre-class work completion and comprehension of the assigned pre-class materials

### Class discussion
- Instructor facilitated discussion and in-class activities covering the learning objectives for the session
-->

# Networking

You have likely been hearing for a lot of your life, even more so now that you are at Texas A&M University, that "networking" is an important step in your career. You have heard this term over and over and over again, usually by people who think they are good "networkers", and you have already gotten sick of it without even possibly knowing what it means. Yes, this term is unfortunately way way over-used by professors, the media, and people you may interact with in class and your clubs. "Networking" can be over-used to mean lots of different things from concepts in math, to plugs that hook your router to your cable modem, to annoying messages you get on your phone, to talking to real people, to reaching out to former students for help advance your career.

The purpose of this section of the course is to discuss what the different types of professional networks and networking opportunities are, why they are each important in different ways, and how you can get started building your professional network today and maintaining it into the future.


## What it is

Within the context of your career (not your home computer and wifi router), "networking" is the act of building and maintaining your professional network. Yes, the term network was just used to define itself, it will become more clear, I swear. 

Next question: What is your "professional network"? Good question. Your professional network is a group of contacts that you have made or gathered through your online and in-person activities who are people who know about you and would be willing to recommend you for things. These are people who remember your name and know some professional facts about you. These facts could simply be that you attended Texas A&M University, or they could be more detailed - that you studied Geography or Geographic Information Science; that you were involved with the TAMU Geography Society; that they met you at TAMU GIS Day; that they saw you present at the Esri PUG meeting; that they worked with you as a student volunteer at the Esri UC; that they worked with you to complete a class project.

In all instances, these are people who have interacted with you personally, or shared a common experience, such as all being Aggies. These are people who you should be able to count on to speak well of you if asked to, particularly in an instance that will advance your career.


## How it Helps You

"Great", so my professional network is a set of people who know who I am, or maybe even not if they are just other Aggies that I have never met. How is this going to help me? Excellent question.

As the saying goes, "[It's not what you know, it's who you know.](https://lmgtfy.com/?q=it%27s+not+what+you+know+it%27s+who+you+know)" This, to many people's rage and frustration, is equally as true today as it has been for a long time. You may often hear about that person that is dumb as s brick, but somehow keeps having good things happen to him - he gets that internship; he gets that full time position - and you keep asking yourself "How is this possible, he is dumb as a brick"? In the vast majority of cases, this can be explained by networking - this person, while dumb as a brick, is charming as all get out, shows up to everything, meets everyone who is there, and follows up by sending emails afterwards - basically people have met and remember him. His professional network, at least on the surface, is strong. Lots of people know and remember this person.

For the rest of us wallflowers, it may be uncomfortable showing up to events where you will know zero people, walking up to a stranger and introducing yourself, perhaps even standing in line to meet a stranger. We may have solid LinkedIn profiles with tons of details about our portfolios and experience, but no one knows to look for us since we are not interacting with anyone. Fewer people know or remember us. Our professional network is not as strong. 

What effect does a strong or weak professional network have? Simple. Opportunity. The bigger and stronger your professional network, the higher the likelihood that an opportunity will come your way or you will win whatever opportunity you are trying for. Why? Simple. People in your professional network are thinking of you - they remember that you are looking for a job so they forward the  job ad at their company to you first; they are rooting for you - they will put in a good word for you with the decision maker to help tip the scales in your favor; and they want to help you be successful - they take time out of their day to help on your behalf.

A decision-maker - a person who decides to hire you or not, a person who decides to do business with you or not, etc. - will be looking for evidence from people she/he trusts that you can do what you say, that they can stand to be around you, and that you are overall a good person they should bring on board. The best kind of recommendation comes from a person who actually knows you, has worked with you, has seen you present, has interacted with you before, etc. because they have first-hand experience with you. They can speak to whether or not you should get the opportunity that is on the table. You need as many people as you can get knowing who you are so that when asked "Should we hire her" the answer is "yes!" from multiple people.

Your reputation precedes you during every aspect of your career. Before people decide to hire you, make a deal with you, or buy what you are selling, they will try to find out about you. They will want to know if they can trust what you say, if you can do what you say, if you do good work, and if you are the type of person they can work with. If they know you personally, best case scenario (assuming they think good thoughts about you). If they do not know you, they will start asking around "Have you ever heard of this kid from TAMU, XYZ? Know anything about her/him"? If no one they know knows you, they will start looking online. If you have no reputation (no one they know knows you and they cannot find you online), you have no chance - other people in the running will be findable and they will go with them. If you have a reputation and it is bad (someone they know knows you and speaks poorly of you, or they find you on the internet and it's not good), even less chance.

Beyond professional network connections that you have established and maintained through in person meetings, there are networks that don't require meeting people in person. These include the Aggie Network, and any kind of social networking site that you may have an account on like Facebook or LinkedIn. While still useful, these are primarily methods that you can use to get your foot in the door at potential job and internship opportunities. The Aggie Network provides you with a way to contact people who are at specific companies or in specific industries to begin a personal relationship in order to potentially leverage them as a connection in the future. LinkedIn is a place where you can join professional "groups" to post messages to build your credibility as well as list a very long and detailed resume. Facebook has passed its prime and is no longer a place for professional networking.


## What it is Not

Your professional network is not a dedicated group of people who work 24x7 to get you a job. You have to do all of this work on your own. They are simply there to provide a good word for you at the right time to help you get a job that you have already applied for.

Your professional network is not a support group. If you are having trouble finding a job, you should not vent via frustrated emails to people who you know. You will make them start ignoring you and potentially sour your relationship with them.

Your professional network is not a group of strangers your email to ask for favors. If you do not know these people personally, or have not interacted with them over email a few times, you should probably not be asking favors of them. You will come across poorly.


# Types of Networking

There are two main types of networking that you can do to boost your professional network. These are: In person networking, where you meet real people in real life; and virtual networking, where you "connect" with people online who you may not have met yet in real life. 


## In Person Networking

In person networking is definitely the more impactful of the types of networking. There is simply no better way to get a person to remember you than to meet them in person so they can associate a face with a name. You can strike up a conversation and chit chat about professional topics to make the person understand that you are a capable communicator (speaking and listening). You can find out inside information about a job that you are interested in, and you can create a reason that you need to contact this person in the future.


### Conference Presentations

Far and away, the absolute best way to network is to present a paper or poster at a professional conference or meeting. Here, you are showing off your actual excellent work that you have produced to other professionals in the industry. They can see with their own eyes what type of work you are capable of, how you can communicate the importance and impact of your work, how you can explain complicated topics to people who may not be familiar with your area of work, and how you can summarize and present scientific results. The people you present to will remember your name, they will remember what you worked on, and they will remember that you are the type of person that they want to hire. You may or may not have a line of people wanting to talk to  you, but even if you have just one, you have made an important impression to this person and she/he will remember you for it. 


### Conference Volunteer

Not every conference paper and poster gets accepted, and you may not be far enough along in your coursework to present something. Don't fret, there are still opportunities for you to make a professional impression with professionals in the field that will allow you to stand out from your peers. The first of these is to volunteer at the conference. Almost all conference allow students to volunteer to help run the conference, with many paying for a portion of your travel costs for doing so. When you take these opportunities, you get to demonstrate to the conference organizers (who are professionals in the industry/area that you want to be in) that you can work as a professional, side by side with other professionals to get the job done. Depending on the conference, the job may be lame - like counting people in rooms; or it may be exciting -like getting to be the tour guide around campus for the keynote speaker. In all cases, someone will assign you a job to do, and it is up to you to do a good job at that job so your "supervisor" will remember that they can count on you, that you acted in a professional manner, and that you are the type of person that they can imagine working with for 40 hours a week. For companies like Esri, conference volunteer opportunities are treated as extended interviews, so you must treat them this way in order to not blow your chances of getting an internship or full time position with the organization.


### Conference Attendee

If you cannot present or volunteer at a conference, you should still go. All of the people you want to meet to get that internship or full time position will be there, so you should be too. If you are not presenting or volunteering, your full time job at the meeting will be to network. Meet as many people as you can by going to taks, finding the speaker afterwards and starting a conversation relevant to her/his talk with them. Other opportunities include the lunch and coffee breaks where you should suck it up and walk up to strangers and start a conversation or ask if you can sit at the table to eat your food. Introduce yourself, and everyone else around the table will introduce themselves as well. Say that you are a Texas A&M student and that this is your [first, second, etc.] time attending this conference. Ask people what they thought about the plenary of if they saw the same interesting talk that you saw. Ask them what they hoped to learn at the meeting, and tailor a story about your degree to match that. Ask them what organization they are from and what they do, tailor a story about how you want to do that as well, or how you are learning about that in your class. In all cases, give and get business cards, be professional, and try to make them remember you for some kind of professional reason. Try to setup a need for a follow up email so you can contact them after the meeting about something that you can use as your opening for whatever it is that you are hoping to get (internship, job, etc). Know that many of these interactions will not result in anything (most people are not going to hire you), so you have to increase the number of these interactions so you can find that needle in a haystack that will help you achieve your goals.


### Mixers

Beyond formal conferences and professional meetings, there are tons of "mixers" out there in the geospatial industry which are mostly just get togethers where people in the same industry all show up at the same restaurant or bar for an hour or two to mingle and chit chat. Sometimes, these events are held in conjunction with formal conferences, during the evening after the main conference events. In all cases, the purpose of these events is to bring together people with a common set of interests (usually an industry or career) in an informal setting where they can get to know each other. There are usually no agendas, but sometimes there are planned presentations or other formalized networking opportunities for a portion of the meeting, with the remainder a free-for-all of meeting, greeting, and mingling. These events often offer free food, sponsored by a company or organization and sometimes have arranged for free or discounted food and beverages with the establishment. These events offer a great opportunity for aspiring professional to meet with people who currently work in a field  to get to know them and build their professional networks. All of the same tips apply - show up, suck it up and introduce yourself to people, ask to sit down at a table of strangers, nahd out  your business cards, and try to make a reason to contact people afterwards.


## Virtual Networking

Showing up in person is the best way you can network, but doing a bit of online networking is also (fortunately or unfortunately) required these days. From setting up professional profiles on services such as linkedin, to correctly using Facebook, to reaching out to Aggies around the world, and earning cred, there are many ways that you can create, maintain, and enhance your professional network using online services.


### Aggie Network

According to the TAMU Association of Former Students (AFS), the Aggie Network is one of the most important benefits that you get from attending TAMU. For most people, their only interaction with AFS is when they get a call or email asking for them to donate money. Get used to this. You will get these calls and emails for the rest of your life, no matter what you do. However, by attending TAMU and joining the AFS, you do inherit a gigantic rolodex (google it, [it used to be a thing](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=rolodex)) of people in a variety of industries and at a variety of different stages of their career who are Aggies, just like you are. Turns out, these are actually important connections. You would be surprised how helpful other members of the Aggie Network will be if you just take the time to reach out, ask relevant and professional questions, and build a relationship - starting online and moving into the real world. There are actual stories that you will hear about how people got jobs by connecting with Aggies at a company that they want to work at after finding them on the Aggie Network. It sounds kinda like an uncomfortable match-making site, but these things actually do happen. You should use the Find an Aggie tools at the AFS site to look for people at the companies that you want to work at. You should reach out to these people with relevant professional questions. You will be surprised how many of them write back and actually offer to help. In addition, you should show up at some of the Aggie events in other cities as you move for your jobs. You will make connections with people who share a part of your history, and some of them will be useful in your professional career. For real. It actually happens.


### LinkedIn

As if there weren't enough social media platforms out there already, LinkedIn started several years ago as the "professional" social media company. Basically, LinkedIn is just like any other social media platform in that you create an account, can sign up for groups, and then you get tons and tons and tons of emails from them that you will eventually just start ignoring. LinkedIn **used to be** a place where you groups and connections meant something, but these days, not so much since most people get overwhelmed with the emails and notifications and wind up totally ignoring them. That said, LinkedIn does have its uses. First, it provides you with a free website profile page where you can upload and store as much information as you like, at no cost. You can use this to create a really strong portfolio with images and maps and tons of detailed descriptions about the projects and other experience that you have. It's open to the public, indexed very well by Google, and free. Creating a detailed profile provides a way for employers to find you, and allows you to have tons of project details that would not otherwise fit on your resume to show off your geospatial knowledge, skills, abilities, and experience. Second, people post jobs to LinkedIn. Granted, they typically also post these jobs to other sites like Indeed, but there _might_ be some that are only posted to LinkedIn. Third and finally, if you do join groups like the [Texas A&M GIS](https://www.linkedin.com/groups/8124955/) and [Texas A&M GIS Former Students](https://www.linkedin.com/groups/8124989/) groups, you will get notifications about things that you (hopefully) care about like jobs that have been sent to our department, and TAMU events at conferences. In sum, it's better than Facebook, and you need to have a LinkedIn page. 


### Facebook

Often described as a "smoldering dumpster fire of leaked personal information, ads, fake news, Russian election meddling, and other information I couldn't care less about", the days of Facebook as a professional networking platform are near over. Still, many people do use Facebook. **You **should not use Facebook for professional networking, it is nearly impossible to keep it professional. If you choose to use Facebook, one bit of advice is to separate your information into a personal account and a professional account. You should never post anything to either that you think would be embarrassing or reflect negatively on yourself or your organization. You should use your personal one for keeping track of friends, and your professional one for keeping track of colleagues. If you take this approach, all of your colleagues will not get notified when your mother posts baby pictures of you, despite how many times you have asked her not to. Since most users of Facebook have little to no control over anything (although Facebook has setting buried deep down in there that allow it), it is quite challenging to keep things you don't want to show from showing if other people do not respect your wishes. Separate your accounts, lock down your privacy settings, and hope for the best. It won't work out, but still go ahead and hope.


### Message Boards

Ever searched google for a problem that you are having with your computer, or with software like Esri? Isn't it amazing that there is an answer out there for nearly every single question that you have ever asked? Yes, real people write those answers. The people who write them are demonstrating their mastery of solving other people's technical problems. Yes, you can answer questions too. One of the best ways to get your name out there to people is to answer these message board questions. Tons of people read them. You will get internet-famous and people will search you out and try to hire you since you are clearly an expert in whatever area you were answering questions on. However, you should only put your name out there on the internet if you are pretty darn sure that your answer is correct. The internet remembers, so if your answer turns out to be garbage, your name will be associated with a wrong answer that people make fun of for all eternity.


#### The internet is forever

It is important to keep in mind with all digital stuff (websites, social media platforms, emails, google docs, etc.) that the internet is forever. Once you post that comment, update your status, send that email, there is no way for you to take it back. There will **always** be a record somewhere that will pop up and embarrass you right at the worst time. Do not ever do the following:



1.  Allow naked pictures of yourself to be taken. No matter how much you love this person and they say they will delete them, there will always be copies. Employers will find them.
1.  Allow pictures of yourself being drunk, doing drugs, or committing crimes to be taken. There will always be copies. Employers will find them.
1.  Post naked pictures of yourself. These will never disappear from the internet.


# Tips


## Business Cards


### Get them

Wait, what? I'm a student, how can I get a business card and what should it say? Yes. You can get a business card. It should look like a TAMU business card and it should say that you are student in the Texas A&M Department of Geography. It should include your name, your email, and your phone number. It should be printed on business card cardstock, not on printer paper. You can make these yourself in Word, or you can order them online. [They cost almost nothing](https://lmgtfy.com/?q=business+cards), like really almost nothing - $8.50 for 500. But don't they have to be official? Yes, but aren't you officially a student at TAMU? Won't the university get mad if I make my own business cards? Nope. Won't the printer get mad if I make TAMU business cards? Nope. No one checks, no one cares. You can make a business card that says you are the President of the United States from an online printer if you want, no one will stop you. Remember, "Aggies do not lie, cheat, or steal", so be do not lie, cheat, or steal on the business cards that you make, but make them. 


### Always carry them

Always, always, always have a stack of business cards with you that you can hand out. You will run into people who can help build your professional network at the craziest places, and you will wish that you had a business card with you if you don't. You want to be the person that always can give out your information when the opportunity strikes, not the type of person who has to enter someone's email on your phone as you are talking to them. Even more importantly, if the other person does not have a business card to exchange with you, they can write their information on the back of yours for you to keep.


### Write down what you talked about on the back

When you get a business card from someone, you should write down what you discussed on the back of their business card. Especially in a meeting setting, where you will be meeting dozens of people, there is almost no chance that you will remember what you talked about with a person without taking notes, right away. You will not remember later that evening what you talked about, what you promised to to, or what you had intended to follow up about, nor will you remember a week later when you finally get to sending messages to people that you met. Carry a pen, and simply tell the person - "I meet so many people at these meetings that I can never remember what we talked about unless I write it down", then write it down. They will not think it's weird, and will likely think to themselves, "Wow, that's a good idea. I should do that." 


## In Person Networking


### Show up

For real. Show up to things. The best way to build your network of people willing to vouch for you is to show to events and meet people. If you do not show up, you cannot win. Winning can mean a lot of things - building your network, finding out about a job that has not been posted online yet, finding out that you know someone who works at the organization you want to work at, meeting the person who will be reviewing resumes, making a good impression with the supervisor of the person who will be reviewing resumes, etc. It is impossible to know what opportunities you missed at an event that you did not show up at, so show up. Sure some of these events require travel to another city in order to participate, or they may require a registration fee. Sometimes you have to spend money (and time) in order to make money, that's just how it goes. Luckily for you, most events that you would want to go to have student assistantship programs where the organization or TAMU will cover a portion of your travel. Additionally, almost every professor will give you an excused absence if you travel to and participate in a professional meeting.


### Talk to people

Yes, it is hard to walk up to strangers and introduce yourself. But, you know what? The person you are about to walk up to probably also does not know anyone else. Walking up to strangers is super uncomfortable for most people, but standing awkwardly close to someone and not striking up a conversation is equally weird and can feel worse. Just suck it up, look her/him in the eye and say, "Hi, my name is XYZ, I'm a student at Texas A&M. What is your name"? If you run out of things to talk about, just ask them questions. People love talking about themselves. Ask where did they go to school, how long have they worked where they work, is this the first of these meetings they have gone to, have they seen anything interesting or unexpected at the meeting? Just keep asking relevant questions and providing your own relevant responses to their answers and the conversation will keep moving along.


### Do what you say you're going to do

If you get into a good conversation with a person and tell them that you will do something - send them an email, contact someone for them, etc - make sure that you do it. If they get an email from you after the event saying that you have done what you said you were going to do, this demonstrates that they can count on you. And, hopefully you did something meaningful, that will also provide value to them and make them value their relationship with you.


### Follow up

Even if you did not promise someone that you will do something, you should still follow up with them by sending an email to say "It was nice to meet you. If you are ever up at TAMU for [a football game or other event, like GIS Day], I would love to meet up to discuss [something related to a professional topic]." Almost always, the person will respond back and say it was nice to meet you and that if you ever need anything that they can help with, you should contact them back. You now have an open invitation to email this person about some kind of specific help that you need in the future - there is an opening at their organization that you would like to apply for, they know someone that you need to get to know for some reason, etc. In all cases, you have an email from them offering to help you that you can reply to at any point in the future to actually ask for help.
