# GEOG 215 In-Class Activity: Week 06 - Resumes
>Topic: Resumes
>
>Type: Reading + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Points possible: 1
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your in-class materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your in-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late in-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

## To Hand In
1. Student #1 will fill in the [Google Form for this resume review activity](https://goo.gl/forms/jc2N1SFgZAfV4BZo1).


# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking, reading, and speaking skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a geospatial position and evaluating if a resume is appropriate for that position.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a letter of recommentation request.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a resume for a geospatial position.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess the duties and qualifications of a job advertisement, company, and industry.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can compare the duties and qualification of a job ad against those listed in a resume."
    >
2. For students to be able to evaluate a person's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking - "I can articulate what knowledge, skills, and abilities a person has that make them qualified for a specific geospatial job."
    >
3. For students to be able to assess the the written work of another person.
    >
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can critically review the writing of a another person to assess quality, professionalism, and fit for a position."
	>
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can review the requirements for a job (skills, duties, and qualifications) and assess if a resume speaks to them."
    >

# ToDo
1. Each student will be paired with another student in the class

2. Students will introduce themselves to each other

3. Student #1 will review and critique the resume of Student #2.

	1. Presentation
      	1. Length
			1. Does the resume completely fill out one single page?
       	2. Format
			1. Does the resume properly use margins (not too wide, not too thin top/bottom and sides)?
			2. Does the resume properly use bold, italic, or other text markup?
			3. Does the resume properly use whitespace (enough to not be a solid wall of text, but not too much to have large gaps)?
			4. Does the resume properly use headings or other breaks to separate sections?
       	3. Grammar and punctuation
			1. Does the resume use proper grammar and spelling?
			2. Does the resume consistently use proper capitalization?
			3. Does the resume consistently use proper punctuation?
	2. Content
       	1. Header
			1. Does the resume include relevant and required contact details?
       	2. Education
			1. Does the resume include relevant and required education details?
				1. Univerity
				2. Degree
				3. Year(s)/Month(s)
				4. GPA
       	3. Relevant Work & Project Experience
			1. Does each of the items include relevant and required details?
				1. Position title;
				2. Orgnization name;
				3. Organization location;
				4. Date(s);
				5. Description of duties;
			2. Is each of the items relevant to the job ad?
			3. Does each of the items include an appropriate description?
				1. Is the description a maximum of 2 line(s)?
				2. Does the description include keywords from the job advertisement?
			4. Relevant Skills
				1. Does the resume include relevant and required skills details?
					1. Proficient in
						1. Does the section include keywords from the job advertisement?
					1. Familiar with
						1. Does the section include keywords from the job advertisement?

4. Student #1 will fill in the [Google Form evaluating the resume of student #2](https://goo.gl/forms/jc2N1SFgZAfV4BZo1).

5. Student #1 and #2 switch, do the same.


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>

