# GEOG 215 Speaking Assignment #1

>Topic: Industry Presentation
>
>Type: Presentation + Writing + Discussion
>
>Style: Individual
>
>Minimum presentation length: 5 minutes
>
>Written response word count: 250
>
>Points possible: 750
>

# Homework Video
[Homework #1, Speaking Assignment #1](https://youtu.be/6sOh_9JPym4)

# Due Dates and Other Instructions
> Due date: Your materials should be completed and submitted by the start of the class period following week the assignment was assigned.
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your assignment is still due at the time and date of your registered section.
>
> Late assignments will not be counted toward your final grade without prior authorization from the instructor or according to the [University Excused Absence and Makeup Polcies](https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/).
>
  

# To Do
>
>1. Using their knowledge from the "Public vs. Private" lecture materials and activities, students will prepare and record an individual 5 minute presentation which compares the factors and expected outcomes of joining a public (government) geospatial organization vs a private one (publicly traded, privately held, or non-profit).
>
>2. Each student will choose one type of organization that they wish to work in, and discuss why a public or private organization is the right choice for them at this time.
>
>3. Each student will record this five minute discussion using their phone or computer and upload this recording as a private video to YouTube.
>
>4. Each student will create a private link to the video and post the video link (along with their information) to [the Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/E5XKmT8tH4DUpBeE8).

# To Hand In
>
>1. Each student will record their five minute recording about the assignment topic.
>
>2. Each student will upload their video as a private recording to YouTube.
>
>3. Each student will generate a private link to their YouTube video.
>
>4. Each student will add the link to their video to the [Google Form  for this assignment](https://forms.gle/E5XKmT8tH4DUpBeE8).


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Presentation - Individual Assessment](../rubrics/individualpresentation.md)
>

# Additional Information/Resouces

## Instructions on access the Google Drive Form/Spreadsheet to submit your assigment

If you get a message that says you need permission to access a Google Drive Form, Spreadsheet, etc. for turning in your assignment, [please see these instructions](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/accessingGoogleDriveForms.md).


## Instructions on creating and uploading a video to YouTube

If you need help learning how to create a video or upload it to YouTube, [please see these instructions](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/recordAVideo.md).
