# GEOG 215 Speaking Assignment #3
>Topic: Networking Presentation
>
>Type: Presentation + Writing + Discussion
>
>Style: Individual
>
>Minimum presentation length: 5 minutes
>
>Points possible: 750
>

# Homework Video
[Homework #6, Speaking Assignment #3](to be recorded)


# Due Dates and Other Instructions
> Due date: Your materials should be completed and submitted by the start of the class period following week the assignment was assigned.
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your assignment is still due at the time and date of your registered section.
>
> Late assignments will not be counted toward your final grade without prior authorization from the instructor or according to the [University Excused Absence and Makeup Polcies](https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/).
>

# ToDo
>
>1. Each student will attend at least one GIS Day networking session (), , , , or ) and attempt networking, in real life. Options for networking abound, including:
> * [Happy Hour 1](https://gisday.tamu.edu/sessions/#/details/64b32049-5bda-4b0f-b4ba-d0d9cdf9e3f7?utm_source=tamu-geog&utm_medium=web&utm_content=geog-215&utm_campaign=gisday-general-2019-11-10)
> * [Keynote Reception](https://gisday.tamu.edu/sessions/#/details/742f9c41-c194-4149-b43c-6ecd90281b4a?utm_source=tamu-geog&utm_medium=web&utm_content=geog-215&utm_campaign=gisday-general-2019-11-10)
> * [Industry Speed Dating](https://gisday.tamu.edu/sessions/#/details/90c0da4b-edc7-4c0d-a91f-6efb7621f8a3?utm_source=tamu-geog&utm_medium=web&utm_content=geog-215&utm_campaign=gisday-general-2019-11-10)
> * [Career Fair](https://gisday.tamu.edu/sessions/#/details/dfe2b4eb-9093-4c4f-9216-9f0973f2faec?utm_source=tamu-geog&utm_medium=web&utm_content=geog-215&utm_campaign=gisday-general-2019-11-10)
> * [Happy Hour 2](https://gisday.tamu.edu/sessions/#/details/ad0c21e7-0dfd-4c10-858d-e94eb9c48def?utm_source=tamu-geog&utm_medium=web&utm_content=geog-215&utm_campaign=gisday-general-2019-11-10)
>
>
>2. Each student will prepare an individual 5 minute presentation within which they detail a positive or negative experience that they have had in the process of networking. This must include a discussion of your in person, but can also include any experiences with digital networking. Discuss what worked well and/or what did not work well. 
>
> * What were you trying to acheive? 
> * How did you try to accomplish your goal?
> * How did it go? 
> * What would you do differently?
>
>
>3. Each student will record this five minute discussion using their phone or computer and upload this recording as a private video to YouTube.
>
>
>4. Each student will create a private link to the video and post the video link (along with their information) to [the Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/t5WzRadNREFrBREBA).



# To Hand In
>
>1. Each student will record their five minute recording about the assignment topic.
>
>2. Each student will upload their video as a private recording to YouTube.
>
>3. Each student will generate a private link to their YouTube video.
>
>4. Each student will add the link to their video to the [the Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/t5WzRadNREFrBREBA).


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Presentation - Individual Assessment](../rubrics/individualpresentation.md)
>

# Additional Information/Resouces

## Instructions on access the Google Drive Form/Spreadsheet to submit your assigment

If you get a message that says you need permission to access a Google Drive Form, Spreadsheet, etc. for turning in your assignment, [please see these instructions](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/accessingGoogleDriveForms.md).



## Instructions on creating and uploading a video to YouTube

If you need help learning how to create a video or upload it to YouTube, [please see these instructions](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/recordAVideo.md).
