# GEOG 215 Speaking Assignment #4
>Topic: Teamwork Presentation
>
>Type: Presentation + Writing + Discussion
>
>Style: Group
>
>Minimum presentation length: 5 minutes
>
>Points possible: 750
>


# Due Dates and Other Instructions
> Due date: Your materials should be completed and submitted by the start of the class period following week the assignment was assigned.
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your assignment is still due at the time and date of your registered section.
>
> Late assignments will not be counted toward your final grade without prior authorization from the instructor or according to the [University Excused Absence and Makeup Polcies](https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/).
>

# ToDo

>
>1. Each student will be assigned into a team. Review [this Google Drive sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/192gNACVh16yr4WJRBX-aVvsaePeFnECWkodBNxLpv2I/edit?usp=sharing) to see what team you have been assigned to.
>
>2. Each student team will communicate to arrange a meeting outside class to complete the assignment.
>
>3. Each student team will determine a topic to insstruct the class on.
>
>4. Each student team will prepare a team-based 5 minute presentation within which they teach the class how to do anything that every member of the team is good at (making grilled cheese, meditating, driving a car, etc.)
>       1. All members of the team should contribute the creation and delivery of the presentation. Each team member should:
>           1. Help determine a topic;
>           2. Create the presentation materials for the topic; and
>           3. Deliver a portion of the presentation.
>
>5. Each student team will record this five minute discussion using their phone or computer and upload this recording as a private video to YouTube.
>
>6. Each student team will create a private link to the video.
>
>7. Each individual student will post the video link (along with their information) to [the Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/7rjYe4h5P1mKFK4c8). Each member of the team should submit the same YouTube link.
>
>8. Each individual student will complete this [Google Form](https://goo.gl/forms/isezIFHwnJntOx4X2) analyzing how well their team functioned across a number of teamwork categories.

# To Hand In
>
>1. Each student team will record their five minute recording about the assignment topic.
>
>2. Each student team will upload their video as a private recording to YouTube.
>
>3. Each student team will generate a private link to their YouTube video.
>
>4. Each individual student will add the link to their video to the [the Google Form for this assignment](https://forms.gle/7rjYe4h5P1mKFK4c8). Each student on a team should enter the same link to the same video.
>
>5. Each individual student will complete the [Google Form for this assignment](https://goo.gl/forms/isezIFHwnJntOx4X2).

# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Presentation - Individual Assessment](../rubrics/individualpresentation.md)
>
>[Presentation - Group Assessment](../rubrics/grouppresentation.md)
>
>[Teamwork - Individual Assessment](../rubrics/teamworkindividual.md)
>
>[Teamwork - Group Assessment](../rubrics/teamworkgroup.md)


# Additional Information/Resouces

## Instructions on access the Google Drive Form/Spreadsheet to submit your assigment

If you get a message that says you need permission to access a Google Drive Form, Spreadsheet, etc. for turning in your assignment, [please see these instructions](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/accessingGoogleDriveForms.md).


## Instructions on creating and uploading a video to YouTube

If you need help learning how to create a video or upload it to YouTube, [please see these instructions](https://github.tamu.edu/TAMU-GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/GEOG-215-GeospatialCornerstone/blob/master/HowTos/recordAVideo.md).