# GEOG 215 In-Class Activity: Week 10 - Cover Letters
>Topic: Professional Writing - Cover Letters
>
>Type: Reading + Discussion
>
>Style: Pairs
>
>Points possible: 1
>

# Due Dates and Other Instruction
> Due date: Your in-class materials should be completed and submitted by the end of the class period this week.
>
> Section specific dates and times:
>
> * Section 931: Due Monday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 932: Due Wednesday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
> * Section 933: Due Friday of the week, 11:10AM Central Time
>
> If you have chosen to attend another session other than that which you have registered for, your in-class materials are still due at the time and date for your registered section.
>
> Late in-class materials will not be accepted without a university excused absence, and will not be counted toward your final grade.
>

## To Hand In
1. Each student will fill in the [Google Form for this cover letter review activity](https://goo.gl/forms/vvy14d4qkNwZ5koj2) for their partner.


# Purpose
The purpose of this activity is to provide students with an opportunity to practice their critical thinking, reading, and speaking skills in the context of understanding the requirements for a geospatial position and evaluating if a cover letter is appropriate for that position.

What types of skills is this preparing students for? 

> At the conclusion of this lesson, students should be able make the following "I can ... " statements in the context of a cover letter for a geospatial position.

The specific goals of this assignment are the following:

1. For students to develop the ability critically assess the duties and qualifications of a job advertisement, company, and industry.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking  - "I can look at a geospatial job and pull out the hidden meaning of what the job is actually looking for."
    >
2. For students to be able to evaluate a person's fit for a job.
    >
    > - Critical Thinking - "I can articulate what knowledge, skills, and abilities a person has that make them qualified for a specific geospatial job."
    >
3. For students to be able to assess the the written work of another person.
    >
    > - Critical thinking  - "I can critically review the writing of a another person to assess quality, professionalism, and fit for a position."
	>
	> - Critical thinking  - "I can review the requirements for a job (skills, duties, and qualifications) and assess if a cover letter speaks to them."
    >

# ToDo
1. Each student will be paired with another student in the class

2. Students will introduce themselves to each other

3. Student #1 will review and critique the cover letter of Student #2.
	1. Presentation
      	1. Length
			1. Does the cover letter completely fill out one single page?
       	2. Format
			1. Does the cover letter properly use margins (not too wide, not too thin top/bottom and sides)?
			2. Does the cover letter properly use bold, italic, or other text markup?
			3. Does the cover letter properly use whitespace (enough to not be a solid wall of text, but not oo much to have large gaps)?
			4. Does the cover letter properly use headings or other breaks to separate sections?
       	3. Grammar and punctuation
			1. Does the cover letter use proper grammar and spelling?
			2. Does the cover letter consistently use proper capitalization?
			3. Does the cover letter consistently use proper punctuation?
	2. Content
       	1. Introduction
			1. Does the cover letter properly and professionally introduce the person and the job they are applying for?
       	2. Company
			1. Does the cover letter properly and professionally discuss why the person wants to work at the company?

       	3. Goals
			1. Does the cover letter properly and professionally discuss how this company and positition match the goals that the person has for their career?

       	4. Qualifications
			1. Does the cover letter discuss how the person's experience and education match the duties and qualifications of the job?
			2. Does the cover letter use hard skill words from the job ad?
			3. Does the cover letter use soft skill words from the job ad?

       	5. Uniqueness
			1. Does the cover letter properly and professionally tell a story about how the person is unique in a way that is related to the job and company?

4. Student #1 will fill in the [Google Form evaluating the cover letter of student #2](https://goo.gl/forms/vvy14d4qkNwZ5koj2).

5. Student #1 and #2 switch, do the same.


# Grading
>
> This assignment will utilize the following rubrics:
>
>[Participation - In-Class](../rubrics/participation.md)
>
